But the annexation of Sicily was not necessarily a painless process.
The Papacy had long sworn eternal hatred against Frederick II and his
descendants, and the usual papal weapons of excommunication, interdict
(of Sicily), and releasing Peter III’s vassals from any allegiance to him was
soon followed by an invasion of Aragon by French troops in 1286. Parallel
to this, noble disturbances and an urban revolt in Barcelona created havoc
in the Aragonese–Catalan realms. Against all these enemies, Peter triumphed.
The French were beaten back and internal enemies and revolts were put
down forcefully. But his victory did not mean an enhancement of royal
authority.
The Aragonese nobility protested vehemently that they had not been
consulted on Sicilian matters. Organized into a union and meeting at
Zaragoza, the rebellious nobles wrested from the king a confirmation of
their ancient privileges and liberties in 1283. From this challenge to royal
authority originated the office of the Justicia of Aragon (see also below and
chapter 6), a sort of ombudsman whose authority, as protector of Aragonese
liberties, would play a central role in Spanish politics into the early modern
period. The Catalans soon followed suit. In December 1283 the Catalans
demanded that all royal legislation and taxes be approved by the Catalan
Corts (or representative assembly), and that meetings of the Catalan Corts
be scheduled annually. The king, facing papal opposition and a French
invasion, acquiesced to the demands.
Unlike other realms in the medieval West, which in the late thirteenth
and early fourteenth centuries underwent dramatic transformations that
allowed for a greater centralization of power in the king’s hands, in the
Crown of Aragon, Peter III’s victories were followed by a series of con-
cessions which formalized the relationship of the Crown to local institutions
and elites. Thus, from then onwards the Corts or parliaments of the three
constituent kingdoms exercised a great deal of autonomy, and Barcelona
retained its traditional liberties. The kings of the Crown of Aragon saw66 The Answers of Politics, 1300–1350
henceforth their powers limited by the “constitutional” arrangements that
emerged from the conflicts of this period.
Peter III’s sons, Alfonso III (1285–91) and James (Jaume) II (1291–1327),
inherited the motley territories of the Crown of Aragon. Alfonso received
the Crown of Aragon proper, while James inherited Sicily, pointing to the
institutional fragility of the Aragonese and Catalan realms and the difficul-
ties of breaking away from a long tradition of partible inheritances. With
their respective possessions, they also inherited the continual unrest of the
Aragonese, always ready to rebel on the issue of their traditional liberties
and rights, and of French and papal animosity against the Aragonese–
Catalan presence in Sicily. As Thomas Bisson has noted repeatedly, the kings
of the Crown of Aragon were not forceful in establishing their unchallenged
rule in Aragon, choosing compromise again and again for the sake of a
free hand in the Mediterranean. Alfonso III acted no differently in bowing
to the demands of the Union in 1287 when he confirmed its privileges.
But the king’s reign was not without success, conquering Majorca, and in
1287 Muslim Minorca. The Balearic Islands, with their strategic location
in the western Mediterranean, now became a natural bridge for the Crown
of Aragon’s involvement in Sicily and, eventually, Sardinia, Corsica, and
southern Italy.
Upon Alfonso’s death, after successful campaigns in the Balearic Islands,
James II inherited his brother’s domains and Frederick or Federico, a
younger brother of Alfonso and James, became the viceroy of Sicily. But
Frederick soon claimed the throne of Sicily for himself. For the next two
decades, the Crown of Aragon’s political life was dominated by the
affair of Sicily and by the conflicts between the different branches of the
Aragonese–Catalan ruling house. As an aside to these internal conflicts,
Frederick sponsored a Catalan expedition to the eastern Mediterranean.
In the early fourteenth century, Catalan soldiers and merchants gained
a foothold in Greece, establishing the Duchy of Athens. It remained in Catalan
hands late into the fourteenth century. Ramón Muntaner, one of the most
distinguished chroniclers of the age and a soldier in the eastern campaigns,
wrote a lively account of the Catalan–Sicilian expedition to the East. It remains
one of the monuments of Catalan literature.
James II (1291–1327)
Meanwhile in the peninsula, James II proved to be, in spite of his difficul-
ties with his brother Frederick over Sicily, one of the Crown of Aragon’s
most resourceful kings. He restored royal authority in Aragon (as much as
it was possible to do so within the “constitutional” nature of AragoneseThe Answers of Politics, 1300 –1350
67
kingship). James II also cooperated with the kingdom of Castile in attacks
against Granada and extended Aragonese–Catalan influence in North Africa
and the Levant. And, after a long series of conflicts and diplomatic negoti-
ations, he gained control of Sardinia in 1324, driving the Pisans out of the
island and challenging Genoa for hegemony in the western Mediterranean.
James II was a tireless and capable administrator and diplomat. His labors
provided the Crown of Aragon with a fairly sophisticated bureaucracy and
an efficient administrative structure (see chapter 6). His diplomatic efforts
led to the addition of the counties of Urgell and Empúries to Catalonia
and, through exhaustive negotiations with the French, he gained control
of the economically and strategically important Val d’Aran. James II also
formalized the relationship between the king (or count in the case of
Catalonia) and the Corts or parliaments of the respective realms which were
part of the Crown of Aragon. Working with the Corts and making them
subject to an annual royal summons, James II was thus able to defuse
a great deal of the latent opposition to royal authority and to provide a
regular forum for dissent and complaints. Upon his death in 1327 he left
a realm fairly at peace and in the midst of a brilliant cultural renewal. 16
Alfonso IV (1327–1336)
James II’s son, Alfonso IV, succeeded him to the throne in 1327. He was
almost as capable as his father, but his reign was plagued with unfulfilled
expectations. His alliance with Castile to conquer Granada came to noth-
ing. His second marriage to Leonor, a Castilian princess, was fraught with
difficulties and conflict about the inheritance of Peter, his son by a previ-
ous marriage. Leonor, wishing to advance the claims of her own children,
tirelessly conspired against the rightful heir and became a troublesome
disruption for Alfonso and for the Realms of Aragon. In the early 1330s
the king gave way to his wife’s insistent pleas for her son Ferrán, settling
on him Tortosa, Alicante, Elche, and other important towns on Valencia’s
western frontier with Granada. The citizens of Valencia, however, raised
serious objections at the partitioning of their kingdom and the damage
done to the rightful heir’s rights. In some respects, while the peculiar rights
and liberties of each of the kingdoms of the Crown of Aragon made cen-
tralized rule difficult, in this particular case and other similar ones these
same liberties helped to preserve the integrity of the Aragonese Union.
Alfonso IV had no option but to relinquish his projected settlement on
Ferrán. But the bitter animosity between the queen and her stepson bore
harsh results in Peter’s enduring animosity toward Castile once he ascended
the throne.68 The Answers of Politics, 1300–1350
Alfonso IV’s willingness to step back from his original decision also
reflected his Mediterranean-dominated foreign policy. The unfinished
business of Sardinia loomed large in the king’s concerns. Once again east-
ward expansion and the commercial interests of Barcelona and Valencia
trumped peninsular concerns. By compromising on the home front, the
rulers of the Crown of Aragon, James II, Alfonso IV, and Peter IV, while
not fully preventing pervasive violence or noble and urban unrest, avoided
some of the extreme situations found in neighboring Castile. That the Crown
of Aragon escaped troubling minorities also had a great deal to do with
its relative stability and the ease of dynastic succession. Nonetheless, the
last years of Alfonso IV’s short reign were also shaped by the economic crisis
sweeping the peninsula and the rest of Western Christendom. Although
at the Corts of Montblanch (Catalonia) in 1333, the king’s and the Corts’
representatives were keenly interested in regulating the activities and salaries
of royal officials, limiting torture and mutilation, some of the ordinances,
for example those dealing with livestock (sheep and lambs), reflected
growing concern with the economy. At the end, suffering from severe
illnesses and with most of his ambitious program unfulfilled, Alfonso IV
died in 1336. 17
Peter (Pere) IV (1336–1387)
His successor, Peter IV, known to historians as Peter the Ceremonious, ruled
the Crown of Aragon for over 50 years, placing his powerful imprint on
the Crown and on Iberian history. A formidable ruler and a learned man,
Peter IV faced crucial challenges. First and foremost was how to avoid
the fragmentation of the Crown of Aragon’s lands into particular realms.
Although the union of Aragon, Catalonia, and Valencia was essentially secure,
the kingdom of Majorca (including Perpignan, the growing elusive rule over
Montpellier, and the Balearic Islands of Majorca, Minorca, and Ibiza), plus
Sardinia, Sicily, and parts of southern Italy, were on the brink of develop-
ing autonomously. In the case of Sicily, its rulers were willing to enter in
direct competition with the Aragonese kings. Peter IV also faced increased
conflicts with Castile, mostly as the result of his stepmother Leonor of Castile’s
schemes to advance the fortunes of her son within Valencia and other areas
of the realm. And, as had been the case with his father, Peter IV had to
deal with deteriorating social and economic conditions, highlighted by the
Black Death that devastated the Crown of Aragon’s lands in 1348–50, above
all Catalonia.
What is remarkable is how very successful he was in advancing his agenda
on all fronts. In dealing with the kingdom of Majorca, he used the refusalThe Answers of Politics, 1300 –1350
69
of James III, the almost independent ruler of the southern French and Balearic
realms, to attend a summons to Peter’s court to charge him with breaking
the oath of fidelity owed by a vassal to his lord and thus forfeiting his king-
dom. This was followed by an invasion of the island of Majorca, supported
by a Barcelona fleet, and by the annexation of Majorca, Roussillon, and
Cerdagne (the last two lands located along the border between Catalonia
and France and part of the putative kingdom of Majorca). Thus, his actions
prevented the emergence of an independent realm in the Mediterranean
and northern flanks of Catalonia and of a fierce commercial competitor
to Barcelona’s mercantile activities.
His successes in the western Mediterranean and in the north were marred
by widespread civil wars in Aragon, Catalonia, and Valencia. Difficulties with
his own brother (yet another prince named James) led to the Aragonese
nobles reviving the Union and clamoring for the protection of their vaunted
liberties. Once again, Peter IV ran into the fierce opposition of the indi-
vidual kingdoms seeking their liberties and taking sides on the complicated
politics of succession. His two half-brothers James and, above all, Ferrán
served as a rallying point for the king’s enemies. In the 1340s, the kingdoms
were racked by violence, and it was not until 1348, when the plague led
the rebel armies to disband, that Peter IV gained the upper hand. His
victory over the Unión, as the league of rebels called themselves, in 1348
was tempered by the king’s confirmation of the traditional rights ( fueros)
of Aragon and by further autonomy granted to the Justicia of Aragon. By
1350 his rule was secured throughout the realms and consolidated by
the birth of a male heir. Victory over rebellious subjects in Aragon was
countered by new royal confirmations of Aragonese rights. In Valencia,
however, a kingdom without a long political tradition of dissent, Peter IV
harshly punished the rebels and revoked – though only temporarily – many
of the city’s liberties.
Peter IV faced other difficulties. The first was a war against Genoa. The
conflict was waged not only in the western Mediterranean over Sardinia
but also in the east, where Sicilian and Catalan troops in the Duchy of Athens
engaged Genoese forces. The war ended with the Crown of Aragon main-
taining a fragile hold over Sardinia throughout most of the king’s life. Far
more successful were his campaigns and diplomatic policies in Sicily. They
yielded closer relations between the peninsular and insular kingdoms,
when Peter IV’s second son, Martín, married the heir to the Sicilian throne
and became the viceroy of the island.
By the mid-fourteenth century, the Crown of Aragon and its king, Peter
IV, faced yet another set of peninsular problems. The Black Death played
havoc with the social and economic life of the three kingdoms. Barcelona,70 The Answers of Politics, 1300–1350
which had long been the center of the Aragonese–Catalan economy, began
its slow and inexorable decline. In the east the Crown of Aragon became
entangled in the Castilian civil war and in the spreading violence which
accompanied the expansion of the Hundred Years conflict into the penin-
sula. For the succeeding decades, the Crown of Aragon’s rulers were drawn
into a series of debilitating clashes with their Castilian neighbors, to the
detriment of their Mediterranean enterprises. These are topics which will
be covered from the Castilian perspective in the next two chapters. The
difficulties of the last years of Peter IV’s reign cannot obscure, however,
the king’s many accomplishments. These include his enduring patronage
of culture and his far-reaching administrative reforms. His rule marked
an important landmark in the fortunes and development of the Crown of
Aragon’s social, political, and cultural life. 18
Conclusion
We should not conclude this chapter without a brief look at other Spanish
realms. During most of the thirteenth century, Navarre was either ruled
by great French lords such as Thibault, count of Champagne and king of
Navarre (1234 –53) and his children, Thibault II (1153–1270) and Henry I
(1270– 4). After the marriage of Henry’s daughter Jeanne to Philip the
Fair, the kingdom came into the hands of the Capetian and Valois kings
of France, and later the Evreux family. Only in 1425, with the marriage
of the Infante of Aragon, Juan de Trastámara, to Blanca, did the kingdom
somewhat revert into the world of Spanish dynastic politics (see chapter 5).
Although commercially, linguistically, and culturally Navarre had more
in common with Castile than with France, throughout the fourteenth
century it was within France’s political sphere.
The other great Spanish kingdom was Granada. After the disasters of
Las Navas de Tolosa, Granada withstood the Christian thrust into the south
that led to the conquests of Seville and Valencia. A combination of Christian
weaknesses (due to internal conflict) and Granada’s resilience and prosperity
made the Nasrid kingdom an important player in peninsular affairs right
up to its surrender in 1492. It could mount successful military campaigns
against its Christian neighbors, though by the fourteenth century any
hope of real success rested on alliances with North African rulers. In spite
of a shared religion and language, the Moroccan connection proved con-
sistently distasteful. The other problem was one of constant internal strife
within Granada’s royal family. Succession to the throne was always a risky
business and the most perfunctory glance at the chart of Granada’s kingsThe Answers of Politics, 1300 –1350
71
between the early fourteenth century and the late fifteenth shows how
problematic and confusing an orderly line of descent could be. Palace
politics and coups, assassination, or exile led to unsavory alliances with puta-
tive enemies, and excessive concessions. It undermined Granada’s natural
advantages and strengths.
To contemporaries, the two core political entities in Spain in this period,
Castile and Aragon, must have seemed quite dissimilar, from their language
of administration (the Catalan Corts’ ordinances were in Latin, those of
Castile in Castilian) to their political institutions. Though Castile was far
larger and had greater demographic resources throughout the period,
the Aragonese kings never had their rule as seriously imperiled as those in
Castile did. And the Crown of Aragon made such gains in the western
Mediterranean – holding the promise of great profit and intellectual rewards
– as to equal or surpass those made by Castile in the peninsula. The Crown
of Aragon of course faced problems that were distinct from those of Castile
and of such long-term consequence that they cross the chronological
boundaries of these chapters on political developments.Chapter 4
Toward Trastámara Spain,
1350–1412
As Spain rulers strove to meet the challenges of plague, violence, demo-
graphic losses, and economic upheavals, they also sought to fulfill their
multi-pronged political agendas. First and foremost among them was
expansion and crusade. It is difficult for us in the twenty-first century –
or perhaps not so difficult considering the present political climate – to
think that the sure, and most often invoked, answer to a deteriorating
economy and to social crises was yet another raid against Granada or a
campaign against Moroccan forces in the south, as was the case with
Alfonso XI, or even more ambitious military enterprises, such as those of
James II, Alfonso IV, and Peter IV in the Mediterranean and the Levant.
Territorial expansion and crusades thus remained a vital expression of
kingly authority. And there were, after all, clear benefits to such adventures.
As noted earlier, substantial financial gains could be obtained on the
frontier or in the Mediterranean. A restless nobility could be distracted from
its challenges to the Crown into the pursuit of glory and profits elsewhere.
Warlike kings were always praised by the chronicles, even if their actions
mired the kingdom in endless troubles. Peaceful ones were always bitterly
criticized. In the years after the Black Death, leading to the rise of the
Trastámaras as the sole ruling family in Castile and after 1412 in the
Crown of Aragon, rulers in these two polities engaged in a variety of
moves aimed at maintaining control over their respective realms, while
continuing to advance the Reconquest in southern Spain or to expand in
the Mediterranean. Things did not always work as planned. Castile sank
into civil war, while the Crown of Aragon reaffirmed its Mediterranean
vocation, even though it also developed further along the lines of a feder-
ated model.Toward Trastámara Spain, 1350 –1412 73
The Crown of Aragon from Peter IV to the Compromise
of Caspe (1412)
Peter IV, the Ceremonious (1336–87)
Peter IV’s long rule accounted for many successes but also some serious
and, at times, long-felt reverses. While the Black Death seriously impaired
the economy of the Aragonese realms and their ability to contribute to the
royal fisc, Peter IV had also to deal with a debilitating insurrection in Sardinia
and with the enmity of other great Mediterranean seafaring powers. At the
Corts of Perpignan in 1350, while still in the midst of the devastation of
the plague, the king notified the procurators from the different realms attend-
ing the meeting of the extent of the Sardinian revolt and its implications.
While protesting his own poverty, the king requested a subsidy to meet the
expenses of a Sardinian military campaign. 1
After the mid-fourteenth century, Peter IV, the author of a formidable
chronicle, a patron of the arts, and a ruler with a keen sense of his own
dignity and of court protocol (thus his sobriquet), was drawn even deeper
into a series of debilitating conflicts. Rebellion in Sardinia led to renewed
conflict with the Genoese in both the western and eastern Mediterranean.
Catalan victories over Genoa at sea and successive campaigns to quell
resistance in Sardinia yielded only an uneasy peace. Far more troubling,
continuous warfare had ruined Sardinia, denying the Crown of Aragon any
substantial return for the many years of war and expense. Moreover, in spite
of Genoa’s defeats in 1352 and 1353 in the Bosporus and off the coast
of Sardinia, the Genoese kept providing support for Sardinian rebels.
Furthermore, their commercial presence in the western Mediterranean,
and especially in Castile, was not seriously diminished. In fact, Peter I
of Castile had strong ties with the Genoese, and, in the early years of his
reign, the Castilian king was eager to flex his muscles and test his rivals.
Thus, he sought to exert Castilian control over disputed territories (Murcia,
Alicante, and others). Added to these growing difficulties, there was the
long-lived feud, which was noted in chapter 3, between Peter IV and his
contentious stepmother, Leonor of Castile.
The usual armed incursions, failed or half-hearted attempts at peace, and
renewed warfare in the late 1350s led to a Castilian attempt to land in Majorca
and a Castilian naval attack on Ibiza. By 1363 the Castilians, now allied
with Navarre, Portugal, and the count of Foix, renewed their campaigns
along the Castilian–Aragonese border, forcing Peter IV to go begging to
the Corts for further subsidies. 2 With the coming of the French into the74 Toward Trastámara Spain, 1350–1412
peninsula and Peter IV’s alliance with France and the Trastámara pretender,
Henry, the Castilian threat was temporarily deflected. A change of dynasty
in Castile in 1366 did not mean, however, an end to Aragonese problems,
and Murcia, the Crown of Aragon’s important territorial gain on the western
Valencian frontier, was lost forever. Several lessons can be drawn from this
short account of Castilian–Aragonese antagonism. Even though the Crown
of Aragon had made significant inroads into the Mediterranean from the
thirteenth century onwards, its western flank remained vulnerable. The
Castilians could not only conquer frontier areas – part of the continual shift-
ing of borders between the two realms – but they were able to capture such
important Aragonese towns as Calatayud and Valencian towns such as
Morvedre, and threaten Zaragoza, Valencia (the capital cities of Aragon and
Valencia respectively), and even Majorca in the Mediterranean. Although
Peter I of Castile faced serious opposition at home, the kingdom of Castile
was far more capable of dominating the peninsula than was Aragon. This
Castilian military (as well as demographic) superiority, though not always
evident, would shape relations between the two realms until the Bourbon
centralization of the eighteenth century.
Conflict with Castile was ended by the usual and tired dynastic marriage,
but the last years of Peter IV’s rule over the Realms of Aragon were also
troubled by family dissension. After his third wife, Eleanor, died in 1375,
Peter IV took as his mistress Sibilla de Fortià, a woman of lower rank. When
he married her in 1377 and had her crowned queen four years later, the
king did so without the approval of his two sons (by his marriage to Eleanor),
John (Joan) and Martin (Marti). A noble uprising in the county of Empordà
toward the end of his reign and enduring troubles in Sardinia marred Peter
IV’s final years. Neither these problems, nor Peter IV’s reverses against
Castile, diminished the Crown of Aragon’s gains in the Mediterranean or
the administrative and cultural accomplishments of his reign (see chap-
ters 6 and 8). Peter IV also left two sons, who followed him in rapid
succession. John I had long been a king in training, reaching his thirties
with ample administrative experience but always in his father’s shadow.
John sought to carve his own space, breaking away from the king because
of Peter IV’s fourth marriage to Sibilla and over differences on whom to
support during the Great Schism of 1378 (John supported Clement VI,
the French pope).
John I (1387–1396)
When John finally came to the throne, he did so while suffering from serious
illness (most probably epilepsy) and had little of his father’s diplomaticToward Trastámara Spain, 1350 –1412 75
skills. At the Corts of Monzón (1388), Aragon’s, Catalonia’s, and Valencia’s
urban representatives requested a thorough judicial and administrative
reorganization of the Aragonese realms. John had little patience – loving
to hunt far more than the burdensome affairs of government – or taste for
these parliamentary battles. His responses to the Corts’ demands antagon-
ized and rallied urban representatives against the monarch. Only the inter-
vention of the queen, Yolande de Bar, prevented the worse. John I was indeed
fortunate in his queen, for she proved to be a loyal and resourceful asset
throughout his troubled reign.
In the Mediterranean his delay in responding to threats imperiled
Catalan control over Sardinia, though in Sicily he moved forcefully to secure
Aragonese–Catalan interests through the marriage of his nephew, Martin
(son to his brother of the same name), to María, heiress to the island’s crown.
Although this was a good first step, restoring Aragonese–Catalan control
over the island was a far more difficult task. John I also neglected his rela-
tions with Castile, favoring a French alliance and antagonizing the former
without any substantial gains from the latter. On his southwestern flank,
a revived Granada made feints into Valencian territory. There the large
number of Mudejars, together with Granada’s military presence, made
for a potentially explosive combination. In 1391, to add to John I’s many
misfortunes, waves of violence against the Jews swept the peninsula. In
the Crown of Aragon, the cities of Barcelona and Valencia, and areas in
Majorca, were the sites for some of the most violent attacks on and killings
of Jews, who were given the choice between conversion and death – a story
to be told in greater detail in chapter 7. These events revealed deep fissures
in Spain’s social fabric. As Philippe Wolff pointed out in a short but
influential article more than 35 years ago, the attacks against the Jews resulted
in part from growing social tensions. Long-term anti-Jewish antagonism
joined resistance against royal power, and anger against emerging social and
economic differences to create a volatile and violent conflict. The Crown
and substantial segments of the nobility and clergy rallied to protect the
Jews, correctly perceiving the menacing quality of religious violence. In the
end, growing social unrest and violence intersected with rising tensions
between the king and his respective Corts over issues of administra-
tion, the perception of royal incompetence, legal policies, and taxation.
Meanwhile, the critical issue of a divided Church, exacerbated by the elec-
tion to the papal throne of Pedro de Luna as Benedict XIII (an Aragonese
subject and fairly active in Aragonese politics) complicated international
matters further since Benedict XIII was one of two or three elected popes
contending for legitimacy in the late fourteenth century. John I’s support
for the Luna pope, who was a rather eccentric character at best, caused76 Toward Trastámara Spain, 1350–1412
many complications. When the king died in 1396 in a riding accident, he
left no direct male heirs to the throne and a weakened Aragon, at least in
comparison to the state of the kingdom at the height of the reign of his
formidable father, Peter IV. 3
Martin I (1396–1410)
John I was succeeded to the throne by his brother Martin I known as the
Humane. Such appellations, as noted in the previous chapter, were often
not a good sign of effective kingship in the Middle Ages, meaning that
kings who were too good or “humane” may not rule with the necessary
force required by rebellious estates and nobles. Martin I did try, as did his
wife, to address some of the problems he had inherited. While the king
remained in Sicily, his wife, María de Luna, a relative of pope Benedict XIII,
traveled to Barcelona to preside over the meetings of the Corts and to deal
with the claim to the throne of one of John I’s daughters (or rather of
her husband Mateu de Foix). Since the Crown of Aragon rejected female
succession, even though some of the best rulers of the period were con-
sort queens, María de Luna was able to negotiate the Corts’ acceptance of
the new king and to gain a substantial subsidy from them as an incentive
for Martin to return to the peninsula. 4 Having left his son, Martin the
Younger, and his wife in firm possession of Sicily, the king returned to
Barcelona in 1397. His peripatetic wanderings through the different capitals
of his respective kingdoms – Barcelona in 1397, Zaragoza shortly afterwards,
and Valencia in 1402 – is revealing of the political requirements of ruling
such a federated monarchy as that of the Crown of Aragon. Visiting and
residing in each of these political centers, swearing to uphold each of his
kingdoms’ liberties, confirming their fueros was a requirement. But Martin
I was, for all his good intentions, drawn deeper into the Great Papal
Schism’s complicated politics. His family connections with Benedict XIII
through his wife made him the sole ally of the pope at a time when all
other European powers had abandoned the Luna pope’s cause. In the end,
the pope, besieged and isolated in Avignon, moved his court to Barcelona
in 1409.
At home Martin I addressed three fundamental problems. The first
was the dramatic losses experienced by the royal domain through Peter IV’s
and John I’s grants to the high nobility. Following developments elsewhere
in Europe, Martin I strove to recover as much of the royal domain as
possible and to emphasize its inalienability (see chapter 6). Second, the king
sought, not always successfully, to restore order and to curb municipal and
noble abuse of their dependants. Finally, as Bisson has pointed out, the kingsToward Trastámara Spain, 1350 –1412 77
of the Crown of Aragon could no longer live on their personal income.
The business of government had to be negotiated with the individual Corts
and subsidies obtained from them if the king’s policies were to be carried
out at all. In that sense, the long process of organizing the governance of
the realms in terms of an accepted “balance of political forces” had come
to full bloom. “The king’s power,” in Bisson’s insightful formulation, “had
become that of one privileged estate among several, a power that for most
public purposes could only be exercised through negotiation with the nobles
and urban politicians.” 5 I will have a great deal more to say about these
developments in a later chapter, but for now it may be useful to note that
this was perhaps the most efficient form of governing the disparate realms,
and that, in doing so, the medieval kings of the realms of Aragon proved
to be far more cunning than their early modern successors. In fact, when
Philip IV and his prime minister Olivares sought to impose a Castilian model
on the Crown of Aragon, the result was open rebellion and the wrecking
of Spain. 6
Toward Trastámara Spain
Martin I’s death in 1410 marked the end of a dynasty that harked back
to Sancho III the Greater (1000 –35) and even earlier to Wilfred the Hairy
(873–98). The king’s own son, Martin the Younger, had died a year earlier
in 1409, and no direct descendants remained alive. A constitutional crisis
threatened the wellbeing of the realms, as several candidates to the throne
either came or were put forward by different political forces within the
federation of kingdoms. These candidates included Jaume d’Urgell, a great-
grandson of Alfonso IV, and thus with claims to be part of the royal family.
Jaume may have counted on Catalan support but faced stiff Aragonese
opposition. Louis of Anjou, the French candidate, was himself a grandson
of John I, and he enjoyed some Aragonese support. But the eventual suc-
cessful candidate was Ferdinand (Fernando), regent of Castile and grandson
of Peter IV, the Ceremonious. After a great victory over the Muslims at
Antequera in 1410, he became known throughout the land as Ferdinand
of Antequera, joining his military and political prestige to his rightful
family claims. Emerging as a compromise candidate and with the support
of Pope Benedict XIII, Ferdinand, because of his deep involvement in Castilian
affairs, presented peculiar problems of his own. Representatives of the Corts
of Aragon, Valencia, and Catalonia met at Caspe in 1412. After months
of debate, Ferdinand was elected king in the so-called Compromise of
Caspe. With his election the political history of the two core-realms in the78 Toward Trastámara Spain, 1350–1412
peninsula, Castile and the Crown of Aragon, became even more intertwined.
The Trastámaras, the bastard descendants of Alfonso XI, now ruled over
most of Spain.
Castile, 1350–1410
Peter I (1350–1369)
The chaos and disorder which Castile had endured during Ferdinand IV’s
and Alfonso XI’s minorities were replayed with a vengeance in the second
half of the fourteenth century. Although royal minorities took, once again,
their dismal toll (the minorities of Henry III and John II), the main cause
for political upheavals came from fierce intra-familiar conflicts for control
of the Crown and from the aggressive role of a new nobility born out of
the disorder and civil wars of the 1360s. As we saw in the preceding chap-
ter, the capable Alfonso XI had given his entire affection to his high-born
mistress Leonor de Guzmán, a woman of great ability and fecundity, and
to his large brood of bastard children (mostly males and troublesome).
His wife, María of Portugal, and his only son and legitimate heir, Peter
(Pedro), Alfonso XI mostly ignored. On his second family the king bestowed
the highest honors and juiciest land grants and benefices. In fact, he
created a rival power to that of his son, and his decision to benefit his
bastard children over his own rightful heir brought, as already noted in
the previous chapter, untold grief to the realm. His illegitimate children,
known collectively as the Trastámaras (from the holdings of the eldest male,
Henry, count of Trastámara), began to challenge the power of the newly
named king from the beginning. When Peter I, known in history mostly
because of the propaganda of his opponents as the Cruel, came to the throne
in 1350, he faced the disasters of the plague, the growing political com-
plications of the Hundred Years War, and the power of his half-brothers,
led by Henry, count of Trastámara, and by Fradrique, the powerful master
of the Order of Santiago. Peter I was not helped by the actions of his mother,
María of Portugal. After years of neglect at the hands of her husband, María
saw the death of Alfonso XI and the ascent to the throne of her only son,
Peter, as a golden opportunity for revenge, Leonor of Guzmán was impri-
soned and then put to death, adding resentment and hatred to what was
already an untenable situation. 7
Peter I has been much maligned by historians, but the sobriquet of ‘the
Cruel’ was, to a large extent, justified by some of his actions. His love for
his mistress María de Padilla also created abundant problems, but he mayToward Trastámara Spain, 1350 –1412 79
not have been as evil and violent a king – most kings in this period were
violent – as later chronicles, highly partisan to the Trastámaras’ cause, depicted
him in later years. Faced with the devastation of the plague, he sought to
restore order to the realm, calling a great meeting of the Cortes in Valladolid
in 1351. Attempts to place a ceiling on wages and to survey the resources
of the realm (the Becerro de behetrías), though not too successful, reflected
a willingness to respond to the crisis in a meaningful ways. Nonetheless,
his abandonment and imprisonment of his wife, Blanche of Bourbon, shortly
after their marriage in 1353 and his passion for María de Padilla led to oppo-
sition not only from the Trastámaras but also from urban centers and fac-
tions in the nobility. María de Padilla’s family showed an insatiable thirst
for material gains, further antagonizing urban elites. As an influential pres-
ence in Peter I’s court, the lesser-born Padillas – members of a low aristo-
cratic Sevillian family – did not help the king’s cause. All came to a head
in 1356 when Peter was victorious over a coalition led by his half-brother
Henry of Trastámara. He exiled Henry and subdued the rest; other prob-
lems, however, were building, and were soon to confront him.
Shortly after Peter’s defeat of his half-brother, Castile was drawn into
the conflict between England and France (the Hundred Years War). Around
the same time (1357), Peter launched an offensive against the Crown of Aragon
over disputed territories in the region of Murcia and the taking of Genoese
ships and merchants sailing in Castilian waters (near Cádiz) by Catalan ships.
This conflict, which was also tied to the Aragonese–Catalan support for
Henry of Trastámara (then exiled in Aragon) and the Castilian support for
a disaffected Aragonese prince, became a general peninsular war, drawing
also on allies from beyond the Pyrenees. Castile forged an alliance which
included Granada and Portugal, while the Crown of Aragon benefited from
the support of the Trastámara interests and from rebellious Castilian nobles.
The drama of the period was accentuated by Peter I’s execution of some
of his half-brothers, among them Fradrique and his cousin Juan. The
latter’s murder, as reported by Pedro López de Ayala, a hostile chronicler
of the king’s deeds, was particularly savage, involving the defenestration of
the Infante Juan’s dead body. He had been lured to a meeting with the king
by false promises of a profitable appointment and reconciliation, only to
meet his death. These actions, not untypical of the age, only added to the
growing legend of Pedro’s cruelty.
As we have seen above, Peter I had great success in his campaigns against
Aragon, showing Castile’s superiority in peninsular affairs. Castilian ships
sailed into the western Mediterranean and threatened the Valencian coast,
Ibiza, and Barcelona, while Castilian troops occupied important border towns
in western Aragon. When Henry of Trastámara, Peter IV’s ally, invaded Castile80 Toward Trastámara Spain, 1350–1412
during Peter I’s foray into the western Mediterranean, the Castilian king
returned home, ordered the execution of two additional half-brothers, Juan
and Pedro (he must have taken a particular pleasure in killing a half-brother
named after him), and gained an impressive victory over Henry at Nájera
in 1360. That year it seemed as if Peter I’s star was on the rise. He had
soundly defeated the Crown of Aragon and shown Castile’s power within
the peninsula. He had violently thinned the ranks of his half-brothers by
killing three of them. He had quelled noble threats to his power; his legitim-
ate wife, abandoned two days after the wedding, was securely confined,
while his mistress María de Padilla was, for all practical purposes, the queen.
Peace with Aragon was signed in 1360. The settlement provided consider-
able gains to Castile which kept some of the territories gained on the
Aragonese border and in Murcia. Henry of Trastámara and his allies, no
longer protected by the Aragonese kings, fled to the safety of France. In
the meantime Peter I’s legitimate wife was executed, while the king claimed
that he had secretly married his mistress, making the four children born
from her lover legitimate. Peter was not unique in these outrageous actions
– his namesake in Portugal behaved in the same fashion. Moreover, these
accounts only gloss lightly over the many crimes and excesses of the period.
Marital and succession questions had a way of spilling over into the broad
political arena and of bringing widespread disorder throughout the realm. 8
Conflict against Aragon was renewed in 1362 with Peter I of Castile’s
successful invasion of the Crown of Aragon’s southern flank, leading to the
occupation of towns in the Valencian hinterland. A peace treaty, signed
in 1363 at the insistence of the Pope, only postponed further hostilities. In
1365 Henry of Trastámara, now a claimant to the throne and enjoying
widespread support within Castile from towns and nobles and abroad from
the Crown of Aragon and the king of France, forged a broad alliance against
Peter the Cruel. The main element of their plans was to bring the French
constable Bertram Du Guesclin and his mercenary troops into the penin-
sula at the very high cost of 300,000 gold florins. A very capable military
leader, Bertram, by refusing to engage in pitched battle and by harassing
the English troops with hit-and-run tactics and small skirmishes, had
been able to reverse the earlier English gains in the Hundred Years War.
His troops were composed mostly of mercenaries (the routiers) who, after
a temporary peace treaty between France and England, caused havoc in
the area around Paris. Their expedition to Spain served two purposes:
providing a well-seasoned armed force against Castile’s king and removing
their troublesome presence from France. Faced with these enemies, Peter
I sought an English alliance and lured Edward the Black Prince (son of
Edward III of England and heir to the English throne) to Spain with theToward Trastámara Spain, 1350 –1412 81
promise of important territorial grants in the Bay of Biscay region. On
April 13, 1367, Prince Edward and Peter I inflicted a severe defeat on the
invading Franco-Aragonese-Castilian armies at Nájera. Bertram was cap-
tured and Henry of Trastámara had to flee the battlefield. 9
Peter I’s desire to kill those captured at Nájera, his inability to fulfill his
agreements with Edward the Black Prince, and the latter’s illnesses led to
the English withdrawal from the field. By 1369 Henry of Trastámara, once
again with French and Aragonese support and with widespread recogni-
tion of his claims to the throne from most of the important urban centers
in northern Castile, invaded the realm. This time their combined forces
defeated Peter I at Montiel. In March of that year, the Castilian king was
lured to a parlay with Bertram Du Guesclin, and there he was murdered
by his own half-brother – his body left unburied and exposed to public
mockery. Henry now became king of Castile, the second of that name,
and a bastard branch, that of the Trastámaras, came to rule the kingdom
of the castles and lions. But, after such widespread disorder, the future looked
uncertain indeed.
The Trastámaras in Power
Henry (Enrique) II (1369–1379)
Henry II came to power at a time when the Castilian realm was at a cross-
roads. While the kingdom had undergone serious crises and transforma-
tions (see chapter 2), it had also experienced a vigorous cultural flowering
and dramatic developments in its administrative and legal structures (see
chapters 6 and 8). The new dynasty came to power having given lavish grants
and titles to supporting nobles, and territorial concessions to their royal
allies in France and the Crown of Aragon. Henry II’s initial hold on the
crown was a tentative one. New men came to the fore demanding a share
of the victory, and the king also granted them substantial privileges and
lands. Historians have long argued that the first decades of Trastámara rule
witnessed the disappearance of the old nobility, a nobility dating to the
late eleventh and twelfth centuries, and its replacement by a new nobility.
In reality, the transformation was signaled by the rise to prominence of
lesser branches of the great old noble houses, with a few new lesser nobles
rising to very high status. This promotion in rank was tied to the grant-
ing of large estates and to extensive royal privileges. Such erosion of the
royal domain and authority had, in turn, disastrous consequences for
Castile over the next hundred years. Not unlike France or England in the82 Toward Trastámara Spain, 1350–1412
late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the rise of the nobility led to waves
of violence and instability. Securely grounded in their new economic
power and high standing, the Castilian nobility challenged royal authority
and even coveted, as was the case in the reigns of John II and Henry IV,
the control of the Crown. In many respects, however, the nobles did not
have to look too far for a model. The Trastámaras, using the positions, titles,
and income given them by their father (Alfonso XI), rose to the throne.
But many of these developments were still to be played out in the future.
In the early 1370s, Henry II still had to consolidate his position against
a host of new enemies. 10
Restoring order and securing his throne were not easy tasks. Henry II
faced the armed opposition of Peter I’s followers. It did help considerably
that Peter had left no legitimate male heir in the peninsula (though in Castile,
unlike France, women could inherit the crown) who could be raised as
a legal alternative to him. Nonetheless, Peter’s supporters controlled some
important strongholds around the country. Not only those resisting from
within, but also the rulers of Portugal (King Fernando, 1367–83), the Crown
of Aragon (Peter IV), Navarre (Charles II, the Bad, who had played such
a sorry role in France’s disturbances of the mid-fourteenth century), and
Granada (Muhammad V) saw Henry II’s internal trouble as an opportu-
nity to dismember Castile. Portuguese armies invaded the area of Galicia,
while the Navarrese entered the Rioja region and Granada’s forces raided
the south, taking Algeciras. By resisting some of these invasions and by
adroit marriage alliances between the Trastámaras and the ruling houses
of Portugal, Navarre, and the Crown of Aragon, Henry II was able to with-
stand the initial storm and to lay the foundations of Trastámara hegemony
in Spain; yet, as the frontiers became stable, a new claimant to the throne
appeared. John of Gaunt, Edward III of England’s son and a younger brother
of the Black Prince, had married Peter I’s daughter, Constanza. John now
claimed the Castilian throne on behalf of his wife. Henry II’s response was
to seek closer ties with the French, and the Castilian navy, a formidable
naval force during this period, played a significant and victorious role against
its English counterpart in the 1370s.
From just holding on to the throne he had just usurped, Henry now turned
to the offensive, recovering lands lost to Navarre, invading Portugal, even
threatening the English lands in Gascony and defeating, in alliance with
the French, an English fleet in a great naval engagement in 1375. Far more
significant, Henry II of Castile and Peter IV, ruler of the Crown of Aragon,
agreed to marry their children. Leonor, a princess of Aragon, married the
Infante John (Juan), heir to the throne of Castile. This union eventually
led to Trastámara control of most of the peninsula and to the union of theToward Trastámara Spain, 1350 –1412 83
realms in the late fifteenth century. This did not mean, however, that
amicable relations prevailed between the two kingdoms, but the matrimonial
alliance allowed Henry to advance his political agenda internally and to
embark on territorial expansion against Navarre and Portugal. In less
than ten years, and after very uncertain beginnings, Henry II was able to
establish his rule throughout the realm and to leave the kingdom to his
heir without too many challenges. This he did by claiming to descend from
de la Cerda family. Thus, the Trastámaras traced their lineage back to Alfonso
X, while branding Sancho IV and his progeny as usurpers. That Peter I the
Cruel was represented as an ally and protector of the Jews, and, in some
of the most virulent propaganda, as the illegitimate son of a Jew, only helped
discredit the legitimate line while exalting the Trastámaras. In the end
a large prize had to be paid nonetheless for this favorable outcome. As noted
earlier, lavish grants, given to the nobility as the means to secure their
support during the civil war, led to untold violence by the nobility in the
succeeding years. 11
John ( Juan) I (1379–1390)
The last years of Henry II’s reign and the early years of John I were domin-
ated by the struggle against Portugal and by the Trastámaras’ attempts to
dominate the peninsular political agenda. These murky conflicts, shifting
alliances, and open warfare took place in the context of the Great Schism
and of the continuing conflict between England and France. Loyal to their
long alliance with France, John I had to fend off the English advances in
the peninsula while attempting to intervene into Portugal. The Portuguese
king Fernando died in 1383, opening the door to Castilian claims to the
Portuguese crown through John’s marriage to Fernando’s daughter, Beatriz.
The union of the two realms was, however, not yet to be. The majority of
the Portuguese people rallied behind João, the illegitimate son of king Pedro
and half-brother to Fernando. Chosen to be king by the Portuguese Cortes
in 1385, João I reignited the long-term Portuguese alliance with England
and blocked Castilian incursions on Portugal’s eastern frontier. John I
of Castile did not accept his defeat quietly and invaded Portugal in 1385.
At Aljubarrota, the Castilian army suffered a crushing defeat, insuring
Portuguese independence and the success of the new ruling house of Avis.
After the reverses in Portugal, John I had to face other threats. John of Gaunt,
now the father of the new king of England, the first Lancaster monarch,
made yet another claim to the throne of Castile. Although John of Gaunt
successfully invaded Galicia, he was unable to make any progress into
the Castilian heartland. One gets the impression of endless conflict, but in84 Toward Trastámara Spain, 1350–1412
reality the Trastámaras, John I of Castile in this specific instance, were able
to weather the frequent political storms and international antagonisms and
achieve some modicum of peaceful relations with other Iberian kingdoms
and even to begin plans for expansion. In terms of John I, these plans were
cut short by his unexpected death in 1390. In many respects, John I, as his
father Henry II had done, was able to solidify Trastámara control of the
realm, to gain, albeit through exorbitant bribes, the reluctant support of
the nobility, and to pass his kingdom to his son without too much dissent
from either the nobility, the urban representatives to the Cortes, or the high
clergy. That he left a minor son, Henry III, as heir was something he could
not help, but there would be a heavy price to pay, as was always the case,
for extended royal minorities. 12
Henry (Enrique) III (1390–1406)
When Henry III came to the throne at the age of 12, the usual scramble
for control of the regency took place. While threats from the outside were
not as pressing as in previous minorities – John of Gaunt’s claims had been
settled by a dynastic marriage and the Lancaster family had far more import-
ant business to attend to in England – a fragmented regency and the Castilian
Cortes’ attempts to settle the affairs of the realm led to further disturbances.
No one, however, could have predicted the eruption of anti-Jewish violence
throughout Castile in 1391. Beginning in Seville and swiftly spreading to
other towns in Andalusia and northern Castile – Cordoba, Cuenca, Burgos,
most notable among them – thousands of Jews were either killed outright
or forcefully converted to Christianity. The violence and the social tensions
underlying the attacks against the Jews did not bode well for the young
king, as the Crown made futile efforts to stop the carnage and destruction
of Jewish property. Assuming power in 1393, Henry III, barely 14 years
old, proved to be, in spite of his continuing ill health, a forceful ruler. His
main goal was to curb the ambitions of the high nobility and, specifically,
those of his uncle Fradrique of Benavente, one of the original regents. During
Henry III’s rule, the Castilians gained a firm hold on the Canary Islands,
establishing a Castilian outpost in the Atlantic. On the crucial issue of
the papal schism, Castile, as had been the Trastámara policy, sided with
France in calling for Benedict XIII’s resignation. 13
It is difficult for us today to recognize fully how much energy medieval
rulers deployed on the issue of the papal schism, or how very troubling
the existence of two and, at times, even three contending popes was for
medieval Christians. Their deep concerns serve as a constant reminder of
the links between politics and religion and the impact which the Great SchismToward Trastámara Spain, 1350 –1412 85
had on the late medieval West. But besides the Castilian king’s interest
in the end of religious strife within the Church, Henry III also faced a
resurgent Granada. As he made preparations for a campaign to respond
to Granada’s invasion of Murcia, he died, a mere 27 years old, in 1406.
The Perpetual Minority of John ( Juan) II (1406–1454)
Leaving a small son of 2, John, as his heir, Henry III’s death opened the
gates to a turbulent period in Castilian history, with episodic violence that
would not abate until the reforms of the Catholic Monarchs. In contrast
to the usual patterns seen in the regencies of unfortunate Castile – in the
short span of time covered by this book, if one counts Ferdinand IV and
Juana la Beltraneja as bookends, Castile endured five minorities – John’s
minority proved to be a great deal less troublesome than previous ones.
The late king’s brother, Ferdinand, later Ferdinand of Antequera and king
of the Crown of Aragon in 1412, was a forceful and capable regent, though
not without larger ambitions and not without a desire to further his own
and his children’s fortunes at the expense of the Crown. He shared the regency
with John II’s mother, Queen Catalina of Lancaster, a vain and ineffectual
ruler. Following an old and well-tried formula, Ferdinand marched south
to meet the forces of Granada and to profit from raids and contributions
to his crusading efforts. His victory at Antequera over the Granadian armies
in 1410, followed by a spectacular triumphal entry into Seville, provided
Ferdinand with the prestige and resources for his bid to be selected as
the next king of the Crown of Aragon. But Ferdinand shrewdly built for
himself and his children an unassailable power base within Castile. The
troubles of the next five decades bore sad witness to his ambitions. It is to
them that we now turn.Chapter 5
Spain in the Fifteenth Century
Toward the Rule of the Catholic
Monarchs, 1412 –1469
In 1412 Castile and the Crown of Aragon came to be ruled by closely related
members of one family, the Trastámaras, with Ferdinand of Antequera
as king of Aragon, and John II, his young nephew, as king in Castile.
Illegitimate by birth, having come to the throne by assassination, the
Trastámaras – Isabella and Ferdinand were direct descendants of Henry of
Trastámara – fought against great odds while slowly building the founda-
tions of Spain’s hegemony in Europe and the known world in the early
modern period. If the particular histories of Castile and the Realms of Aragon
were strongly linked in cycles of familial alliances and violent antagonisms
before 1412, by the early fifteenth century their histories became inexorably
intertwined. In spite of frequent marriages between the two branches of
the family throughout the fifteenth century – incestuous ties one may
call them – of which the fabled union of Isabella and Ferdinand was only
the most productive, the relations between the two realms were anything
but peaceful. In reality, any hope of a working partnership seemed nearly
impossible.
In the Crown of Aragon each distinct realm had needs which were quite
incompatible with those of Castile. As the Trastámaras came to rule Aragon,
Valencia, Catalonia, and their Mediterranean possessions, their interests and
policies shifted to reflect their subjects’ trans-Pyrenean and Mediterranean
concerns. Nonetheless, for the more than half-decade between the Com-
promise of Caspe and the marriage of Isabella and Ferdinand the histories
of these two realms needs to be seen as a whole, even though, for the sake
of clarity, they are presented here as distinct. Paradoxically while the
violence of the nobility became an endemic scourge in Castile during the
first seven decades of the fifteenth century, and high nobles made seriousToward the Rule of the Catholic Monarchs, 1412 –1469 87
attempts to either control the Crown or despoil the realm, the kings and
the high nobility could also engage in extravagant excesses and fanciful dis-
plays across political boundaries. All these took place while the peasantry
in both realms suffered greatly from violence and growing economic dif-
ficulties. Decline and disorder in one area were matched by new and
unprecedented sources of income. The wool trade that had begun in
earnest after 1350 now brought a flood of money into the pockets of those
nobles, ecclesiastics, municipal councils, and members of the royal family,
which owned large flocks of sheep. It brought instant wealth to merchants,
generating for the Crown huge tax income collected on the movement
and grazing (portazgo and montazgo) of the transhumant animals. It also
generated considerable tithes on the export of wool and the import of
textiles and other luxury items. 1
In the Crown of Aragon endemic social and political conflicts in Barcelona,
violence in northern Aragon, and the remenças’ rebellion throughout most
of northern Catalonia in the fifteenth century had, as their counterpoint,
the Aragonese–Catalan control of Naples from the mid-fifteenth century
onwards, the reception of Italian humanism, and profitable trade with Italy
and North Africa. The period was a turbulent one, but it was also dazzling
in its accomplishments and gaudy displays.
Castile, 1410–1469
John II (1406–1454)
