Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008CHAPTER I GENERAL INTRODUCTION NDENIABLY the first half of the seventeenth century in Europe (or for that matter in China and to a lesser extent India) was an eventful period, full of conflicts. In China a dynasty collapsed amidst pea- sant revolts and for the last time nomadic invaders conquered the settled lands. In Europe there were more widespread and prolonged wars than ever before, the assassination of one king and the execution of another, while revolts of whole kingdoms and provinces against their rulers took place from Ireland to the Ukraine, from Muscovy to Naples and from Portugal to Anatolia. But has this period in Europe any distinctive charac- ter or significance for those who feel a need to find such things in history ? Recent fashions would cause many historians to answer No for a variety of reasons. The most general one would be that to make Europe the centre of a general history is at once anachronistic and parochial, a quaint attempt to prolong nostalgic memories of the domination of the world by western European culture and power, which ended in 1942, if not before. As Europe's place in the world has changed, so has our perspective of history. Still obsessed by the view which tacitly dominated so many earlier European historians that power is the essential subject of history and that only success and never failure deserve study, some historians were so dis- orientated by Europe's loss of power and so beguiled by the rhetoric of the new leaders of Afro-Asian states and by counting the heads of the big battalions that they became prophets, unmaking the past in order to gratify an imaginary present and an improbable future. This first intoxi- cation has scarcely survived the demise of those first leaders. But one curious result has been the proliferation of posts and courses for teaching African history to a much greater extent that those dealing with Asian civilizations which really do have long recorded histories. All states feel a need to supply or invent a history for themselves and this need is now partly met for African ones, as a kind of penitential exercise by their former rulers. This may be politically or morally edifying, the develop- ment of techniques for using oral tradition even advances genuine know- ledge, but as far as the seventeenth century is concerned, it cannot substan- tially alter the perspectives of European or world history. U More persuasively and presumably democratically it can be argued that it is arrogant and inappropriate to concentrate on 100,000,000 Europeans to the exclusion of two or three times as many Asians. As yet, despite their trans-Atlantic conquests and command of oceanic routes, Europeans were not decisively superior in political organization, in military or other Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR technology to Asiatic societies and empires, by whom they were generally treated as dubious parasites. The answer must be that while knowledge of the economies and societies of Europe is still very imperfect, it is far worse for those of Asia, but also that it was to be European powers which con- quered and transformed Asia. This is something which will always be a major episode of world history, whatever changes in political power and academic fashions the future may hold. Transformations in the organiza- tion of war, especially war by sea, began to make European powers decisively stronger in the seventeenth century. The development of science was to have even greater long-term effects in providing Europeans with greater power, but the seventeenth century was more decisive in changing educated Europeans' ways of viewing the world than in giving them im- mediate command of new means to change it. Even if these reasons for concentrating on Europe are acceptable, the first half of the seventeenth century may not make an intelligible or profitable period of study. Men of the time, Galileo, Bacon, Descartes, Gassendi, saw themselves as apostles or discoverers of new systems of knowledge which broke with past traditions. Historians of science may dispute some of 'the new philosophy's' claims, but not that there was con- tinuity of development before and after the middle of the century. How- ever, searchers for landmarks might note that in 1609 Kepler's New Astronomy broke with the tradition of treating the planets' motions as circular and presented the universe as a machine, while in 1659 Huygens constructed his perfected pendulum clock: 'the first apparatus that em- bodies in its construction the laws of the new dynamics... not of empirical trial and error' (Koyre). The facade of Maderna's Santa Susanna in Rome (finished in 1603) is generally considered the first fully typical baroque composition. Again there was no neat break in mid-century; while the years from around 1640 to 1670 might be considered the apogee of high baroque in Italy, its influence outside Italy continued to be strong, though not without new rivals. But in economic history the early or middle decades of the century have often been seen as the decisive turning point of a secular trend from expansion to depression. More recently many historians have seen the seventeenth century and more especially the years before 1660 as a period of economic and political crisis, without agreeing as to its causes or even its most important symptoms. This again requires a longer perspective within which to put the fate of a mere two genera- tions. The limitations of the period are both arbitrary and a matter of con- venience, but within them are important problems which can be identified, even if we cannot adequately explain them. To consider such a period mainly through the history of individual states is also open to serious objection. This again is partly a matter of convenience, since in fact individual historians generally study particular societies in depth. The unevenness of information as between different Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION countries and its total quantity for all Europe make effective synthesis unlikely. There are also other reasons. The view that the central process in European history was the building of nation-states is now unfashion- able among historians, though its political influence has never been stronger outside Europe and remains powerful in Europe itself. Every- where in former colonial territories men are attempting to create states with national identities. Such an approach could distort the past when dominated by a teleological drive to demonstrate that the European states of the early twentieth century were both inevitable and morally right. It can also mean that state and nation building, like the ultimate withering away of the state after the dictatorship of the proletariat, can be used to justify almost anything for the sake of national survival, future glory or present welfare. Nevertheless this approach to the seventeenth century does emphasize features of real importance. For it was then that the multi-national monarchy of the Spanish Habsburgs collapsed as an effective power, while the future belonged to states, France, England, the United Netherlands and Sweden, which had achieved a degree of identity and unity. Yet all these countries ruled or wished to rule over territories with separate histories, languages or cultures. The seventeenth century also saw the building up of another multi-lingual empire from a number of territories with diverse historical traditions by the Austrian Habsburgs and the growth of political fragmentation in Germany, despite ties of common language and culture. Because international relations were dominated by dynastic considera- tions, because the rights of provinces, groups, or even individuals, to renounce the suzerainty of particular monarchs were not yet entirely fictional, because of the lack of both the concept and reality of modern linear frontiers between states and because of the international character of much of the culture of courts and ruling groups, the criteria of modern nationalism (meaningless as these often are) were scarcely applicable. It is easy for those of other nations to mock the anachronistic results of projecting backwards the artificial constructs of Irish, Magyar, Rumanian, German or English nationalism, but they are reminders of how much our conceptions of the past are influenced by later, even recent, events. This may be made more precise by a negative example. If the Ukraine had emerged as an independent national state in the nineteenth or twen- tieth centuries, our interpretation of the significance of events in eastern Europe in the seventeenth might be considerably modified, as both English and Irish views on their history have been modified by the exis- tence of the Irish Republic. Perhaps ideally such events should not in- fluence historians, but in real life they do. The variety of interpretations which have been put on the career of Bohdan Khmelnytsky and the treaty of Pereiaslavl of 1654 (the very use of the word treaty has been the subject of prolonged controversies) by Polish, Russian and Ukrainian historians Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR in the last fifty years is an extreme illustration of this, and is not solely due either to difficulties in interpreting the evidence or the deliberate distortions of facts to serve current political purposes. 1 This also suggests that consideration of a relatively short period can be useful in so far as it reminds us of the unforeseeable and unexpected character of what now seem clear or inevitable general trends. In one very general sense European history can be seen as a brutal history of the asser- tion of power inside and outside Europe. Those nationalisms which appear valid and real rather than quaint or romantic expressions of antiquarian- ism are those which acquired sufficient power to assert themselves. If the accumulation of power has seemed the primary object of European states in modern times, it has also been argued that no ruler or state before Napoleon claimed to justify aggression and conquest on grounds of national and cultural superiority or destiny. Undoubtedly such claims became much more clear cut in the nineteenth century, culminating in those of Hitler, Mussolini and Stalin. But if the Habsburgs themselves belonged to a supra-national dynastic tradition of imperialism, the Spaniards who bore the main burden of imperial defence in the early seventeenth century did not see things in the same way. The Castilians' sense of their destiny to conquer and rule was resented by the other Iberian peoples. The popular demand to enforce rules of limpieza (the exclusion of those with Jewish and Moorish blood from honour and office) was both a perversion of Christianity and a variant of the almost universal belief that noble blood was superior to that of commoners, but above all it shows a fierce sense of identity and exclusiveness. There was a popular saying 'Let us acknowledge God's grace in making us men, not beasts, Christians, not Moors, Spaniards not men of another nation' and another among Castilian hidalgos 'I swear to God I am as noble as the king and more so as he is half Flemish'. Quevedo saw the struggle with the Dutch as one for domination of the world. Again some nations claimed to be specially chosen by God; this con- ception was propagated for England by Foxe's Book of Martyrs and culminated in Milton's apologetics and historical projects. The Scots had an older tradition which the Covenanters invoked. 2 The Swedes saw themselves as heirs of the Goths, descendants of Japheth, the oldest nation in the world, world conquerors and teachers of the ancient Greeks. These myths were systematized by Johannes Magnus with further inspiration from the prophecies by Paracelsus and Tycho Brahe of the Lion of the North as the precursor of the second coming and universal peace. 3 Now 1 Cf. C. B. O'Brien, Muscovy and the Ukraine . . . 1654-1667 (Berkeley, 1963); S. Kot, Georges Niemirycz (The Hague, i960); D. Doroshenko, History of the Ukraine (Edmonton, 1939); S. Quillitzsch, 'Der ukrainische Befreiungskampf im 17 Jahrhundert', Deutsch- Slawischen Beziehungen, Vol. 1 (1956), pp. 1-38. 2 See below, Chapter xvm, p. 567. s M. Roberts, Gustavus Adolphus, Vol. 1 (1953), pp. 509-16, 523-6. Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION all these exaltations of chosen nations have millenarian and universalist implications, just as Campanella chose first the Spanish and then the French monarchy as the instrument to inaugurate his general Utopia. But they also fed national pride and self-consciousness in a way that the Ottomans' total identification with a mission of conquest for Islam failed to do: they were so lacking in any pride in pure Turkish descent that the word Turk was generally used in a derogatory sense of nomads and peasants. 1 If national failings were most often invoked by propaganda aiming to serve dynastic and religious ends, the notion of Europe and agreed boundaries for it had emerged by the early seventeenth century. This not so much replaced as modified the old idea of Christendom. Europe and Christendom became largely interchangeable terms; whereas once Christendom had meant all Christians everywhere, Christians were now essentially Europeans: 'Jesus Christ is their way, their truth, their life; who hath long since given a Bill of Divorce to ingratefull Asia where he was borne, and Africa the place of his flight . . . and is become almost wholly and onely European', as Samuel Purchas put it in 1625. He went on to claim a supremacy in Asian trade which was very far from being established, and a power in technology which was at best only beginning. 2 If increasing knowledge of other lands led Europeans to define themselves in terms of the differences between themselves and others, the comparisons were not always favourable to Europe. In the sixteenth century Busbecq and others had made comparisons which favoured the Ottomans. But in the seventeenth century suggestions that Europeans were warlike bar- barians, unworthy of their Christian heritage, when compared with the natural innocence of Amerindians, or the civilized wisdom of the Chinese, became more frequent. The first view was pioneered by Montaigne's reflections on the Brazilians and the standard answer was provided by Botero who argued there was no civilization without cities. The first full accounts of the Chinese appeared in the late sixteenth century and stressed their prosperity and unwarlike character. The Jesuit Ricci began a long tradition which by the later seventeenth century had represented Chinese culture and government as the product of enlightened despotism, but already in the first decade of the century an Italian merchant, Francesco Carletti, anticipated Voltaire in his praise of China. 3 By 1641 the libertin and atheist, La Mothe Le Vayer, in his Les Vertus des paiens hailed the Chinese as practising natural religion in its purest form, while benefiting from the rule of the disciples of Confucius, another, but unmartyred, Socrates. If Purchas inflated naive pride into a premature anticipation of things to come, Europe as a political entity was a conception increasingly in- 1 B. Lewis, The Emergence of Modern Turkey (1961), Chapter 1. D. Hay, Europe, the Emergence of an Idea (Edinburgh, 1957), Chapters 6 and 7, p. n o . " F. Chabod, Storia deWidea d'Europa (Bari, 1962), pp. 64-89. ! Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR voked in diplomatic propaganda. Richelieu claimed to be saving not only German liberties from Habsburg hegemony but also Europe. Jurists were still dominated by Roman or Old Testament precedents in their discourses on the jus gentium, despite the inappropriateness of the circumstances of a chosen people or of an empire with universalist claims to their contem- porary situation of sovereign states without superiors. As full of classical and biblical learning as any of his predecessors, Grotius turned from ius gentium to jus inter gentes. He seems to have been the first to adopt fully the basic axiom common to his successors: that the State is sovereign, subject to no exterior controls and amenable mainly to considerations of its own self-interest. He aimed to show that on those terms it is in the interest of the State to accept the rule of law, since to preserve its existence there must be some community of nations. 1 States had equal rights, even if they had not equal powers to assert them, but over-assertion of power would in the long run be detrimental to the interests of the powerful. This may have contributed to developing some sense of a European community of nations. Grotius had been counsel for the Dutch East India Company and had used the sovereignty of Asiatic states as an argument to reject Portuguese claims based on papal authority, but the recognition of a community of nations which included European and Asiatic ones on genuinely equal terms was to be deferred both by Europeans' assertion of their power 2 and by China's refusal to recognize other states except as tributaries of her emperor. If there came to be general agreement that the frontier of Europe itself was on the Don, this was also a period in which what proved to be lasting boundaries and divisions were achieved. White Russia and Smolensk, Kiev and the Left Bank Ukraine went to Muscovy, Portugal became independent of the Spanish Habsburgs and the religious geography of Germany was substantially settled by the Thirty Years War until the twentieth century. Outside Europe the frontiers between Persia and the Ottoman Empire which Murad IV established are still substantially those between Turkey, Iraq and Persia. Spain ceased to have a monopoly of settlement in the Caribbean and was no longer able to control or limit the settlement of North America by others. In the east Asian archipelago, Spain's hold on the Philippines was finally consolidated, although by 1650 the Dutch had established themselves as the predominant European power. By the mid-seventeenth century Russian traders and trappers had reached the Pacific through Siberia and were in contact with the Chinese on the River Amur. There was some sense of a European culture, though as yet Russia was regarded as largely alien to it. Religious and political controversies like 1 G. Mattingly, Renaissance Diplomacy (1955), p. 294; Vol. HI in this series, Chapter vi; and below, Chapter m, pp. 111-12. ' See below, Chapter XXII, p. 671. Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION those between Bellarmine and James I had a European audience, as did more narrowly academic ones, such as Casaubon's refutation of Baronius, demonstrating that the Hermetic writings were post-Christian. All these were in Latin, like most academic writings. French, Spanish and Italian vernacular cultures were all international in the sense that their influence was felt throughout Europe. Italian influence on painting and architecture was stronger over a wider area of Europe than in the sixteenth century. But it is as well to remember that those whom we now recognize as the greatest writers, thinkers or artists were not necessarily widely influential in Europe in their own times. While Rubens, Bernini and to a lesser extent van Dyck had great European reputations, Vermeer and Velasquez did not. While Tasso, Cervantes, Quevedo, even Marino, were read all over Europe by 1650, neither Shakespeare nor Corneille had an international readership. Descartes is still read and Bacon much mentioned, if less studied, today, but in this period Justus Lipsius was probably more widely read than either. The literary and linguistic influences of French and Spanish, unlike those of Italian, were ultimately more closely connected with exercise of political power. The influence of Castilian language and culture was at its height not only in the lands directly ruled from Madrid, but also in Bohemia, Austria and Germany. 1 Direct influence of Spanish literature went further still; over twenty Jacobean plays derive from Spanish sources, some by way of French translations, but many directly. Fletcher and Massinger both probably knew Spanish. Not only Cervantes' fiction, but many picaresque novels were translated into English, French, Italian and German. Aleman's Guzman de Alfarache (1599, 1604), 'the first full- length realistic novel in European literature', was a best-seller outside Spain and directly shaped the form of the German masterpiece, Grimmel- shausen's Simplicissimus (1669). The direct influence of Spanish on French and English literature was perhaps strongest in the first half of the seven- teenth century, but the number and popularity of translations continued to grow thereafter. The tasks of the more general historian have become so complex that he has little hope of accomplishing anything except the provision of easy targets for criticism by his more specialized colleagues. Historians of art often feel that such historians make extravagant and crude assertions about the geographical and chronological range of baroque art, its con- tent, style and social significance. Some historians of literature complain of the useless proliferation of themes and categories borrowed from historians of art and science. Other historians tend to feel that those who specialize in cultural history use out-of-date analyses and crude concepts 1 H. Tiemann, Das Spanische Schrifttum in Deutschland von der Renaissance bis zur Romantik (Hamburg, 1936). Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR when they refer to the social, political and economic background. Like- wise many economic historians believe that understanding of the funda- mental structure of history and society is only accessible to those trained in statistical and analytical techniques, though they may disagree about how to apply them in demography or price history. Thus the mere his- torian, the man who tries to study events in some general way, was never more at a discount. But general synthesis was almost equally difficult when diplomatic, political, and constitutional history were thought to be the fundamentals. All anyone can hope to do is to interest others in trying to produce better answers or better questions, as well as more knowledge, while resisting temptations to use particular concepts, such as 'conjonc- ture', 'the great chain of being', 'Baroque sensibility', or modern myths such a s ' dissociation of sensibility', or the' organic society', as keys to too many, or in the last two cases to any, doors. If the general economic and social conditions in which states were trying to build up their power are now a major concern of historians, it is only comparatively recently that they have thought in terms of phases of general economic growth and depression. Political and cultural history since the Middle Ages or earlier was usually seen as a progression, sub- jected to temporary interruptions. States rose and declined, but this was usually seen as a transference of power to new leaders, while the general power of Europe in relation to other areas of the world clearly grew between say 1400 and 1800, or 1700. Since economic factors were mainly considered in relation to policies pursued by governments in order to build up states and because economic historians were mainly concerned with the evolution of economic institutions and organization, and of techniques of production, such developments either implied or assumed over-all long-term growth. Some areas were backward, such as Russia, some areas admittedly declined, as did Spain, but this was compensated by growth and advance elsewhere. As the study of economic history developed, historians such as Pirenne rejected concepts of steady evolution in favour of ones of a more cyclical character. Historians have become increasingly interested in stressing disjunctions, price revolutions, or crises. Similar interests have been pursued in political and cultural history. In recent years the seventeenth century has been seen as above all a century of revolution and crisis. Marxist interpretations still stress the older evolu- tionary pattern in so far as they see the crisis as contributing to 'the transition from feudalism to capitalism' and to the ultimate strengthening of 'progressive forces', notably those favouring industrial capitalism. But there tends to be general agreement that the disturbances of the seventeenth century were to some appreciable extent reactions to economic crises and depression, when growth of population and resources were often checked with brutal suddenness, even though important intellectual and cultural developments, especially in science and religion, took place. 8 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION Thus there is currently a general notion of an economic decline, or depression, beginning in the first half of the seventeenth century, signalled by exceptionally violent price fluctuations and intensified by prolonged warfare, so that the century began 'and lived under the sign of depression, contraction, deflation'. Baroque art has been seen as in part a manifesta- tion, conditioned by this social and economic background; a highly emotional escape from the miseries of the world which still reflects its conflicts and suffering. It has also been claimed that late medieval pre- occupation with death, the charnel house and the transitoriness of things reappears as a leading motif of baroque. 1 However this may be, we should at least note that stylistic analysis has always stressed the tensions, com- plications and disjunctions of Mannerist art and architecture and con- trasted them with the harmonious and integrated syntheses achieved by baroque and its exuberance, or even self-confidence. The most important general economic symptoms are held to be the behaviour of prices; in comparison with the sixteenth century fluctuations were more violent and the general trend ceased to rise, turning to stagna- tion or decline. There has been considerable disagreement about when the turning point, or reversal of trend, took place: 1619,1630,1640,1650 have all been suggested, while some have preferred to see it as a cumulative process, affecting different parts of Europe at different times and only completed for all Europe after the mid-seventeenth century. There has been even more disagreement about the nature and causes of the period's political and social crises, 2 except that once again they are held to be somehow related to economic difficulties and depression. Many economic historians have come to believe that they can assess the general trend of an economy by the study of prices. At one time the history of prices seemed so fundamental and all-powerful a source of knowledge that some historians were prepared to infer demographic trends from them. Wiser counsels may now have prevailed, but there is still a belief, mostly strongly held in France, that the study of prices can reveal a basic structure whose long-term changes were largely independent of wars and political events. Sometimes issues have been further confused by speaking of price history as though it were quantitative. No doubt it aspires to be, and a price series can be thought of as measuring something. The diffi- culty may be to decide what it is measuring and what validity it has as evidence. The accepted view is that a continuous rise in price is evidence of economic growth. However, this depends upon a number of assump- tions, not all of them verifiable, about the relationship of price movements to growth in pre-industrial societies with large subsistence sectors. If we 1 J. Rousset, La Littirature de I'Age Baroque en France (1954), Chapter rv. For a sweeping rejection see H. Peyre, 'Commonsense remarks on French Baroque', Studies in Seventeenth' Century Literature, ed. J. J. Demarest (Ithaca, 1962), pp. 1-19. 1 E.g. T. H. Aston (ed.), Crisis in Europe 1560-1660 (1965). Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR say that in sixteenth-century Europe population and towns grew, along with the volume of trade and shipping and the output of the textile industries, more land was cultivated and so on; all these propositions seem probable, but we cannot quantify them and produce continuous series of statistics. Thus such innumerate propositions seem inferior in value to price series, though these are often discontinuous, fail to cover most products other than grain and only cover some areas. Price series, especially when presented as index numbers, silver equivalents, or moving averages, remain the basis for acts of faith, rather than quantitative evidence about the development of the economy. Lack of other evidence may force us to use them as a guide to the direction of economic change, but we must recognize that radical criticism of such procedures is possible. To take price series alone as revealing the fundamental pattern of economic change and then fit other pieces of evidence into that pattern, or explain them away, if they fail to fit into it, is a dangerous procedure which has sometimes been a perhaps unconscious consequence of the first raptures of the quest for une histoire tot ale. It may be worth briefly categorizing some of the main economic inter- pretations offered in recent years. This cannot do justice to the ingenuity and learning of their authors, but may indicate their general characteris- tics, even at the cost of over-simplification, (i) The explanations offered by Chaunu 1 and Goubert 8 may be taken together since they both regard detailed analyses of trends and cycles in prices as a fundamental guide. Chaunu concentrates on international trade and Goubert on the economic history of one region with particular attention to demographic factors; both infer trends of production from indirect evidence, though to differing extents, and both agree that the European economy had moved into depression by about 1650. (2) Abel 8 and Slicher van Bath 4 regard price trends as important, but are concerned with relating them to agricultural production rather than with cyclical analysis and international trade. They see the period from the mid-seventeenth century as the beginning of a period of prolonged depression, contrasting with the expansion of the sixteenth century, and characterized by depressed cereal prices, high real wages, growth of pastoral farming and rural industry. (3) Romano 5 has attempted a general explanation embracing prices, credit, monetary factors, international trade, industrial and agricultural production, which aims to show that a decisive break happened between 1619 and 1622, 1 P. Chaunu, Seville et VAtlantique, Vol. vm, 2, pt. ii; 'Le renversement de la tendance majeure des prix et des activitfe au XVIIe siecle', Studi in Onore di A. Fanfani, vol. iv (1962); 'Reflexions sur le tournant des annees 1630-50', Cahiersd'Histoire, vol. xn (1967). * P. Goubert, Beauvais et le Beauvaisis de 1600 d 1730 (i960), pp. 493-512, 599-624. • W. Abel, Agrarkrisen und Agrarkonjunktur in Mitteleuropa vom 13 bis zum 19 Jahr- hundert (1935); Geschichte des deutschen Landwirtschaft (1962). 4 B. Slicher van Bath, The Agrarian History of Western Europe (1963). e R. Romano, 'Tra xvi e xvn secolo una Crisi Economics 1619-22', Rivista Storica Italiana, Vol. LXXIV (1962), pp. 480-531. 10 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION turning the whole economy towards depression. (4) Baehrel 1 and Le Roy Ladurie, 2 like Goubert, are concerned with particular regions, but have produced more direct evidence of production and the movement of rents and incomes and their relationship to prices. Both believe that their find- ings have some validity beyond their particular regions and do not agree with (1) and (3) that there was a decisive break before 1650. Fifthly and finally there are various Marxist explanations. Some, while still seeing the whole century as assisting structural changes from feudal- ism to capitalism, allow that there were social and economic crises especially in the first half of the century and that the whole period was one of relative economic stagnation compared with the sixteenth century. 3 But some Polish historians, though agreeing that Poland and other coun- tries declined economically, deny that this was true of the European economy in general. 4 Topolski denies that there was 'a general economic crisis in the sense of stagnation or recession caused by a slackening of economic activity'. There was a diversity of developments in the various European countries, so that the regression of the Polish economy was partly due to its exploitation by more advanced countries such as the Netherlands, England and Sweden. As Malowist puts it 'the border regions became in some ways a kind of economic colony of the west', which needed their grain, timber products and raw materials and found them a valuable market for manufactured and colonial goods. This exploitation was to the advantage of western mercantile and industrial interests and of the Polish magnates at the expense of Polish towns, artisans, merchants and peasants. Topolski explicitly denies that regres- sion in Poland was due to war whose ravages after 1626 and still more after 1648 only accelerated a process which had already begun and would presumably have produced similar results eventually without the wars. On the effects of war Topolski has the tacit or explicit support of almost all the historians mentioned. Only Le Roy Ladurie allows considerable importance to the fiscal pressures produced by war. Goubert considers that war had only local and temporary effects on grain prices, always very much less than those of bad harvests, so that it seems implied that war had only relatively peripheral social and economic significance. Chaunu's explanation has already had considerable influence. Because of this and its great range in space, time and information, it is desirable to give a fuller, though still highly schematic, account of it. He argues that there was a chronic shortage of money in sixteenth- and seventeenth- 1 R. Baehrel, Une Croissance; La Basse-Provence Rurale (1961). E. Le Roy Ladurie, Les Paysans de Languedoc (1966). 8 A. Klima and J. Macurek, 'La question de la transition du feudalisme au capitalisme', xi Congres Int. des Sciences Historiques {i960), Rapports, Vol. rv, pp. 85-140; E. Hobsbawm, "The General Crisis of the Seventeenth Centuiy', in Crisis in Europe, ed. Aston. 4 J. Topolski, 'La regression economique en Pologne XVIe-XVIIIe siecles', Acta Poloniae Historica Vol. vn (1962); M. Malowist, "The development of the Baltic countries in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries', Econ. Hist. Rev. (1959). 2 II Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008 2-2DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR century Europe which is a main reason for the progressive devaluation of moneys of account (see Map i, below p. 87). Thus the silver arriving in Seville eased the shortage of trading capital sufficiently to encourage investment in trade and shipping. High prices encouraged economic activity, but continuing inflation meant that a given quantity of silver bought less, while expanding trade needed more working capital. For the growth of trade to continue, the growth of the American mines' output had to be faster than the rise in prices and the increase in the volume of trade, since contemporary instruments of credit required bullion backing. These conditions were met in the generation before 1600, but thereafter silver shipments did not increase, they were roughly fifteen per cent lower for the next two decades and fell increasingly steeply after 1625. The volume of shipping used in Seville's trans-Atlantic trade reached its peak 1608-10, then, after a period of hesitations around a rather lower level, turned decisively downwards after 1622 (see Fig. 3, below p. 90). Chaunu considers that it is impossible to measure production directly so that indices of the volume of activity on the great sea-routes are the best evi- dence available. Seville's Atlantic trade was the motor of Europe's economic expansion as it faltered and then lost power, so the trend of the whole economy turned from expansion to stagnation or decline. The crisis of the early 1620s was ultimately due to the failure to finance a growing volume of trade. This in turn was due to failure to find new mines and new populations to exploit. 'When the expansion of the Spanish Atlantic economy ceased, Europe was plunged into a prolonged crisis from which it did not emerge until the second great colonial expansion, that of the Dutch, English and French colonial empires provided a new stimulus to economic advance.' Thus Chaunu is a theorist of the economic frontier, claiming that ' occupation of space appears to play the same role in the economies of the fifteenth to eighteenth centuries which advances in technology play in economies of the last hundred years'. The chronology of decline in Europe, or of the change from growth to slower growth, differed by regions. In Mediterranean Europe, Spain and Spanish America, it began around 1600, but was later in the Netherlands, the Baltic, Brazil and the Indian Ocean. Considering prices Chaunu finds, between the period of expansion and that of contraction, an episode of varying length in different countries when prices rise more slowly or move along a plateau. The decisive change follows after two or three cyclical crises; it comes earlier in the west than in the east and in the south than in the north, earlier on the coasts as against the interior of the continent. Although Chaunu's original assertion that international prices at Amsterdam showed the direct and immediate effect of the decline of Seville's trade has been accepted by some historians, it ought not to have survived an actual inspection of the fragmentary price series cited from 12 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION Posthumus' History of Prices in Holland. The reversal of trend in Dutch domestic prices came after 1650, or even 1660, thirty or forty years after the decisive crisis at Seville. The causal connections between the two remain obscure. Chaunu has rightly described the decline of Seville's trade as the collapse of a monopoly, but he pays little attention to the problem of whether the volume of Atlantic trade may not have increased after 1620, or 1630, as it was redistributed to the benefit of the Dutch and English. Estimates of Brazil's sugar production suggest that it doubled between 1600 and 1650 and that most of the increase took place after 1630. Again Chaunu only pays attention to trade through the Sound in order to accept Romano's view that its volume declined after the 1620s in step with Seville's. As we shall see this view is mistaken and it is arguable that the trade through the Sound was more important for Europe than Seville's trade had ever been; it certainly employed an enormously greater volume of shipping. But before pursuing these questions, we should note that the interpreta- tion of the seventeenth century as essentially a period of crisis and depres- sion and that of long-term trends in grain prices as indices of economic growth have both been challenged. Falling grain prices are not incom- patible with growth, and the trends of the sixteenth and seventeenth cen- turies could be explained by the bunching of good and bad harvests. 1 More generally Schoffer has suggested a different perspective for the seventeenth century. 8 Until the eighteenth century a large proportion of the population, more especially urban populations, were liable to suffer severely as a result of comparatively slight dislocations. A bad harvest, an epidemic, shortage of current coin, military looting and requisitioning could have quite disproportionate effects. The purchasing power of the population was so low that the prosperity of much trade and industry, domestic and foreign, depended on the behaviour of a small elite. When such precarious demands failed the whole economy might be shaken. Fluctuation and instability were thus built into the structures of economic and social life. Schoffer agrees that the seemingly limitless prospects of expansion outside Europe of the sixteenth century were checked in the seventeenth, and allows an agrarian recession after 1650. But he argues that it is difficult to infer continuous economic crisis or severe depression from the evidence of prices alone. He suggests that it is quite possible to see the seventeenth century as one of growing economic stability and rising real wages with declining silver imports contributing to that stability. As population growth slackened there may have been not only more money in circulation than in the sixteenth century, but also more per head of population. Clearly there were tremendous shifts of economic and political 1 M. Morineau, 'D'Amsterdam a Seville, de quelle reality l'histoire des prix est-elle le miroir?' Annales (1968). 1 I. Schoffer, 'Did Holland's Golden Age coincide with a period of Crisis?' Acta His- toriae Neerlandica, Vol. 1 (1966). 13 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR power from southern to north-western Europe, but such shifts could also make for greater stability, * . . . a period of solidifying and organizing. Inside Europe prices, currency circulation became more settled and stable. The state grew more than the economy.' This is a reminder that the older conception of state-building as the main subject of European history has not been entirely replaced by studying economic and social structures and trends. The fragility of demographic structures and those of international trade both suggest that states had a limited amount of economic potential to exploit, quite apart from limited means of influencing their economies in peacetime. Thus bad harvests might have more serious or widespread direct effects than war. Yet the indirect effects of war—prolonged fiscal pressures, the prevalence of inducements to finance tax-farming and war rather than trade, the persistent spread of disease and diversion of man-power—must have had longer-term economic effects at least as important as those of bad harvests and conceivably more important than those of the failure to find new silver mines. A vigorously expanding economy could doubtless afford more expensive and extensive wars than a declining one, but the example of Spain suggests that the will to fight wars could multiply economic difficulties. Again, countries whose wealth was based to a greater extent on sea-power and maritime trade could profit by open or undeclared wars. But it is difficult to see that Spain, allegedly the economi- cally dominant country around 1600, was in a really strong position in terms of wealth or growth of economic power between 1580 and 1620. If we consider the impact of war on Europe in the sixteenth century, Italy, Germany, the Netherlands, France, Spain, England and Scotland were all seriously affected directly or indirectly between 1540 and 1559. By 1559 the most serious results had been in the finances of all the states concerned, but the most serious economic effects had probably been on Italy. The Italian economy seems to have recovered and probably grew after 1560, but from the 1560s wars, rebellions and civil wars increasingly affected the Netherlands, France, Spain, Portugal, England and Ireland, while Italy was less directly affected. From the 1590s the northern and southern Netherlands and France recovered; trade and industry then expanded to new levels. In France this ended in the 1630s and in the Netherlands later. The economy which did not recover, but declined, was that of Spain, or more particularly Castile, which had put most resources into war. Although the economies of the Netherlands and England re- covered from the crisis of the early 1620s, that of northern Italy did not: there the Mantuan war at least assisted the demographic disaster of 1630. 1 It may seem superficial to suggest that the multiple effects of war were enough to check economic expansion between the 1620s and 1660, but it is 1 See below, Chapter 11, p. 76. 14 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION worth noticing that the countries more protected from the full effects of land war and more dependent on maritime trade, the northern Netherlands, England and Portugal, did best. The exception here is Venice, but she was involved in a crippling war for Crete, when her trade and sea-power had already been declining for a generation. For the moment economic hypotheses and analysis must be postponed in order to consider some general social factors. One of the great virtues of Abel, Slicher van Bath, Romano and Baehrel is that they emphasize the primary importance of agriculture. Most historians would agree that both population and agricultural production increased in Europe during the sixteenth century and that probably the cultivated area increased,though whether either substantially surpassed the peaks of the fourteenth century is unclear. This process of internal colonization slackened and in some areas prob- ably ceased altogether in the seventeenth century. Abel and Slicher see this check as happening after 1650, but Romano sees it as a product of the crisis of the early 1620s, a view which is unpersuasive for Europe in general. More plausibly he points to what was an almost universal European phenomenon, the increasing pressures on rural populations by owners of land and seigneurial rights. We may add that such pressures were often increased and new burdens added as a result of the fiscal necessities of states fighting wars. Now the traditional elite of owners of land and seigneurial rights had been the nobility, so it is worth attempting some crude approxima- tions of their characteristics and behaviour as a social group. As a corol- lary to the view that the building of nation-states was the essence of European history, most historians in the first decades of this century saw the emergence of 'new monarchies' allying themselves with the urban middle classes, especially with lawyers and merchants, to attack the traditional privileges of the nobles, discipline their unruliness and trans- form them by introducing new men with a new tradition of serving the state. What were the mercantilist policies which such monarchies pur- sued, but basically those of medieval city-states adapted to the needs of larger units, national states? Such concepts produced now-hackneyed phrases about an apparently eternally rising middle class displacing an effete and immemorial nobility and were later reinforced by the supposed effects of the price revolution in promoting capitalism and eroding noble incomes. Yet it is arguable that the monarchies of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were more successful in eroding the privileges and political power of their towns than those of their nobilities. The indepen- dence and direct political power of towns declined everywhere in Europe, except in the United Provinces and Switzerland. The way in which men of the time regarded nobility reveals a number 15 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR of tensions and contradictions in their ways of thinking and acting. Their conceptions also demand an effort of imagination from us. One great modern assumption, or platitude, is that environment is all-important, so that its dominance is often assumed by historians, sociologists and journalists without troubling about evidence. The comparable concep- tions of the past were often based on assumptions about heredity and blood. Such conceptions now seem the more distasteful, because of their associations with virulent racialism. Although there have been great advances in knowledge of genetically determined factors in the history of individuals, the possibility that such factors might have important social consequences lacks the respectability and acceptability of environ- mental assumptions. If we are uncomfortable with the notion of a nobility of blood, so in fact were many people in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It conflicted obviously enough with Christian precepts and there was a very strong medieval tradition, reinforced by much humanist rhetoric, that the only true nobility was that conferred by virtue. Such views had a certain practical convenience in so far as they justified the ennoblement of new men and helped to explain what was already apparent long before the sixteenth century: that many or most nobles were not the direct heirs of Visigothic, Frankish, Norman, Sarmatian, or Trojan nobles. The question as to what made a man noble also involved political theory; there were sayings in many countries to the effect that a king could make a lord or a knight, but not a gentleman. Before considering views about the origin of nobility, we should notice that, though the word noble was usually reserved for the peerage in England, and though in Spain there was a distinction between nobles and hidalgos, in France, Poland and other countries it included those without titles who in England were called the gentry. Nobility will here be used in this com- prehensive sense and it should also be remembered that the father's status and privileges as a noble were inherited by all his sons, not only by the eldest as in the English peerage. Most jurists (and the continental treatises on nobility were almost all by jurists or clergy) held that the effective origin of nobility was in grants by public authority. This is put in its most extreme form by a com- mentator on Louis XIV's commissions to verify noble titles: 'It is an error to believe that Nature has anything to do with differences of status, they are solely the work of the Prince and civil laws . . .' On the other hand from 1578 the king of Poland could not make a commoner noble without the assent of the Diet. Although Bartolus and his successors accepted the general principle of origin in public authority, they also acknowledged the theory of blood and what were still ideals and pre- judices of social life in the seventeenth century, when they said that the nobility of the newly ennobled was less perfect than that of older nobles until four generations had passed and that the most perfect nobility was 16 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION that by immemorial prescription (a lineage without known origins among commoners). Medieval tradition also defended the theory of blood as well as that of virtue. The origin of gentility was in the blessing of Noah; from Japheth, the blessed (incidentally the traditional ancestor of Europeans), descended nobles and from Ham, the accursed, the base and unfree. However there were those, like Raleigh, who held that nobles were the descendants of those chosen by original popular compact and those, like Bodin, who saw their origin in violence and oppression, while others saw them as descendants of conquerors, such as the Franks. Moreno de Vargas (Discursos de la Nobleza de Espaha, 1636) like many of his predecessors quoted St Jerome—Nobilitates mundi nihil aliud esse quam inveteratae divitiae. In their more realistic and historical moments Spanish, French and Italian writers acknowledged that nobility was often the result of wealth, rather than virtue or valour. Moreno remarked (fo. 5iv) that those living in small places, where the other inhabitants were poor, could use their power to escape taxes and thus become accepted as nobles. Before considering the legal privileges of nobles in more detail, it is worth having some notion of their numbers. At the one extreme was Biscaya where all the native-born were hidalgos, at the other the Grison cantons where no noble privileges were recognized. The countries with the highest proportion of nobles were probably Castile and Poland, each with about 10% of the total population; Hungary may have approached this proportion, it was certainly over 5%. In England taking a very wide definition including lawyers, clergy, military and naval officers, Gregory King's estimates suggest about 4% for c. 1688. A narrower definition might perhaps give 2-3% c. 1660. In France c. 1700 it was perhaps 1%, but must have been higher in 1650, though probably under 2%. In Pied- mont c. 1700 it was some 1-5% and was almost certainly lower in the early seventeenth century. It was probably under 1% in Lombardy, a little over 1% in Verona and Naples, perhaps 4% in Imola; well under 1 % in Bohemia in 1618 and probably in Catalonia, it was 0-33 per cent in Sweden around 1610. Thus a very numerous nobility was 5-10% of the population. Countries with small nobilities had 1% or less, such as Sweden, Bohemia, much of Italy and possibly much of Germany. France and England occupy a middling position with somewhat under and over 2% respectively. 1 These percentages are very rough approximations, but at least they indicate how numerically small this important element was. Another broad distinction is that between the mainly town-dwelling nobilities of Castile and Italy and the mainly rural nobilities of England, 1 The Breton nobility is reckoned the most numerous of any French province and numbered some 40,000 or more in 1668, about 2% of the estimated population. J. Meyer, La Noblesse Bretonne au XVllle Siecle (1966), Vol. 1, pp. 55-6. 17 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR France, Germany and Poland. In Castile and Italy nobles dominated most towns and through them the countryside, in Poland and Branden- burg the nobles dominated the countryside and had reduced most of the towns to economic and political insignificance. In France, England and western Germany the towns retained a greater independent identity, economically, socially and politically, though there was considerable interaction between them and rural gentry. In all cases such relationships were influenced by the character of royal authority and administration. The numbers of nobles often varied considerably in different regions of the same kingdom. In Castile they were more numerous in the north- west than in Andalusia; in Poland they were 27 to 31 % of the population in Masovia, in Little Poland 6 3 % and in Great Poland 76%. In Wales the gentry were notoriously more numerous than anywhere in England and Brittany had the same reputation in France. The more numerous the nobles in a given region, the greater the number of poor ones, and the fewer they were, the higher the proportion of rich ones. This brings us to the other distinctive feature of nobilities as social groups, their inclusion of many of the wealthiest and some of the poor in their societies. The very poor nobles were a much smaller proportion of those who were poor, than the rich nobles were of those who were wealthy —the exception to the latter would be the United Provinces. While grada- tions of wealth and status have seldom coincided exactly in any society, the discrepancies in the seventeenth century could be very much greater than in capitalist or communist societies today. There were many officials, lawyers, merchants, even artisans and peasants who were wealthier than appreciable numbers of nobles, except in countries like Bohemia and Sicily where the number of nobles was small and where younger sons could usually be provided for in the church. In all these societies there was great emphasis on rights of precedence and many quarrels turned on the order of seating in church, of receiving the sacraments, in leaving church, in public processions and at banquets and so on. There were hierarchies inside and outside the nobility. Within the nobility titles, whether recently conferred or not, gave precedence, but among those with the same title ancientness of lineage gave precedence and was generally more esteemed than recently acquired titles. All nobilities had to a greater or lesser extent a sense of common identity and privileges which belonged to all their members, irrespective of titles and wealth. Both were perhaps most strongly developed in Poland, where there were no legal distinctions between higher and lower nobility and there was insistence that legally all were equal (though even there the wealthy came to be called nobiles and the poor generosi). The other extreme is England where specific legal privileges were confined to peers of parliament and descended only to the eldest male heir; the rest, how- ever ancient their lineage or great their fortunes, were counted as gentry. 18 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION However they did still enjoy a measure of informally privileged treatment in so far as the full rigour of the law was usually reserved for the poor and humble. It was a common saying among French country gentlemen that they were as noble as the king. The comparison seemed blasphemous to Loyseau and other jurists, but it stressed a corporate pride and a desire for equality within the nobility. The most important privilege possessed by most nobilities, except the English, was fiscal. The exemption of French nobles from the tattle and the distinction between nobles and pecheros in Castile, the immunities from taxation, or preferential rates of tax, belonging to nobles' fiefs and demesnes in most countries, commemorated times when nobles were supposed to have given personal military service. The fiscal privileges of nobles were seriously eroded in France and Castile in our period, but the general tendency for indirect taxes to grow was very marked all over Europe. This was partly influenced by nobles' privileges, though also by a general disinclination of the wealthy to see their incomes taxed and by considerations of fiscal convenience. An important and long-lasting attitude was transmitted beyond Europe by this conception of privilege. Although the Council of the Indies had not favoured the creation of a colonial nobility or sale of titles, the fact that the only pecheros, those burdened with tributes and services, in Spanish America were Indians, Negroes and mulattoes, meant that all white colonists were noble, according to the definition of nobility in Castile. 1 It was altogether fitting that Quevedo's El Buscdn, Pablo, whose consuming, but constantly thwarted desire, was to be accepted as an hidalgo and obliterate his tainted parentage, should end by sailing to the Indies. In Poland nobles were subject to laws providing accusatory procedures and milder penalties, instead of the inquisitorial procedures and severer penalties of the law governing peasants and townspeople. Most nobilities had special customs relating to the inheritance of property, especially that in the form of fiefs: these varied between different regions, as did customs of peasant or bourgeois inheritance. However there were special legal devices creating unbarrable entails of land, such as the Spanish mayorazgo, though by the seventeenth century this was not exclusively used by nobles. In Sicily and the Roman lands such limitations by fidei commissa had developed considerably by the sixteenth century, though in most of Italy, France and the Habsburg lands the main growth was after 1600, while in England the strict settlement developed after 1640. 2 Such devices were of most importance for comparatively large landowners. But there were also older privileges belonging to all nobles. 1 R. Konetzke, 'La formaci6n de la nobleza en Indias', Estudios Americanos, Vol. ni (1951), pp. 329-57- • S. J. Woolf, Studi sulla Nobilita Piemontese neWepocd del'Assolutismo (Turin, 1963), pp. 150-3 and below, p. 583. 19 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR In Spain and France and most other countries nobles were exempt from billeting and could not be pressed as common soldiers, though they might owe personal service to the prince. In most countries the habitual wearing of swords was restricted to nobles and everywhere they claimed exemp- tion from certain forms of punishment, particularly flogging and usually hanging. In England there were no legal rules as elsewhere, but there seems to have been strong conventional feeling that gentlemen ought to be exempt from flogging. In Spain nobles were exempt from torture, except when heresy and treason were involved; they could not be arrested for debt, nor could execution be had on their houses, clothes, arms, or horses. Spanish law, like that of most countries, granted these privileges to foreign nobles who were residents. In some ways the most remarkable privilege recognized almost every- where, except in Germany and England, was that the bastard of a noble was born noble, though he did not inherit his father's rank. After 1600 in France his nobility required confirmation by letters patent which was apparently never refused. This custom shows the strength of the notion of blood transmitted in the male line. In France, the Netherlands, Italy, Germany and Poland some religious houses and cathedral chapters required entrants to prove noble descent for at least three or four genera- tions. In theory in Spain places in the military orders could only be held by nobles and in Castile in most towns half the places in the corporation were reserved for nobles. Two other general conventions with important, if contradictory, social implications are the notion of derogation and its opposite, that certain attainments or occupations automatically conferred nobility. All societies accepted the general idea that there were some occupations whose nature was so base and servile that they were incompatible with nobility, though, unlike other countries, England did not have formal rules about this. This idea goes back to Aristotle and the Greek notion of base and mechanical occupations. The definitions varied, one of the crucial differences being whether to trade as a merchant was incompatible with nobility, as it was in France, Naples, Ferrara, Germany, the southern Netherlands, but not in Spain, Venice, Genoa, Milan, Tuscany, Poland and England. Clearly social conventions exerted pressure whatever rules the law laid down; Spanish nobles were not famous as merchants, though in Seville many were attracted into trade in the sixteenth century. The rules of derogation again emphasize the notion of blood: children born before derogation inherited nobility, a noble recovered his status when he ceased to practise a degrading occupation. The ideal noble 'lived nobly' on the proceeds of his land, not by gainful occupations. This ideal was acknowledged by writers in Italy such as Alessandro Sardo (Discorsi, 1587). 1 Nearly every- 1 M. Berengo, Nobili e mercantt nella Lucca del Cinquecento (Turin, 1965), pp. 252-62, gives a general sketch. 20 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION where it was agreed that retail trade and most handicrafts (with the famous exception of glassmaking in France) were degrading. This feeling about derogation was thought by contemporaries to be strongest in France and more attempt was probably made to enforce the rules there than in most countries, though the feeling was also very strong in Germany and Naples. There are general complaints by Spanish writers about the numbers of poor nobles in degrading occupations, though they seem to have been more concerned about unworthy offices rather than trades. But outside the Basque provinces the relaciones of 1575-80 show that in New Castile the great majority of hidalgos did not 'plough or traffic', though there were a few who worked on the land, and even fewer as craftsmen, such as carpenters or cobblers. 1 Similar feelings existed in England, but remained a social prejudice without legal sanctions: opinion would have found the notion of a gentleman as a shopkeeper or craftsman comically unacceptable, but not as a merchant or entrepreneur, though they might be less esteemed in theory than landowners. Agriculture presented difficulties in this context. There was a strong classical tradition which extolled it as honourable, though in many countries poor peasants were among the most exploited and least esteemed members of society. In France and Spain it was allowed that a poor noble might cultivate his own land, but not those of others. In Italy and Ger- many this degree of tolerance seems to have been lacking, but in some regions of Poland poor nobles were often working tenants or even shepherds. Domestic service was another occupation where distinctions were uneasy. By tradition waiting on a king or a great lord was honour- able, but generally speaking by the seventeenth century such service was coming to be more ceremonious than real, if it were still to be honour- able. 2 In Poland foreigners were struck by the numbers of poor nobles performing actual domestic services to magnates, while wearing their hats and insisting on other marks of respect for their status. 3 German law incorporated the conception of degrading occupations more strongly than elsewhere: Unehrlichkeit and Anriichigkeit due to opprobrious trades, including those of shepherds, millers, tailors, jailers, hangmen and scavengers, excluded men from all judicial procedures and meant that they, their children, or even grandchildren, were excluded from other crafts. If some writers, like Gutierrez de los Rios, 4 arrived at the somewhat unexpected conclusion that agriculture was a liberal art, not everyone in Spain accepted their seemingly more obvious contention that painting 1 N. Salomon, La Campagne de Nouvelle Castile d la Fin du XVIe Siecle (1964), pp. 290-1. ' E.g. C. Loyseau, Traite des Ordres . . . (1610), p. 50, para 34. ' A. Guagninus, Sauromatia Europea (1578) in Respublica . . . Regni Poloniae (Elzevir, 1628), pp. 263-4. * Noticia General Para la Estimacidn des las Artes y de la Manera en que Se conocen las liberates de las que son Mecdnicas y Serviles.. .. (Madrid, 1600), book rv, c. 3. 21 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR and sculpture belonged to the same category. In 1563 the statutes of the Order of Santiago classified painters as 'vile and mechanical'. Architects, helped by their connections with the science of fortification, gained greater acceptance as an honourable profession beyond Italy in the seventeenth century; this was so even in Germany, despite hostility to their mechanical associations with masons, which Count Rochus von Linar had experienced. 1 But much older and deeper tensions arose from questions about the privileges that university degrees and legal offices should confer. These seemed to go against the traditional conception that the noble's true vocation was that of arms. However, Bartolus and his successors had insisted that doctors of laws acquired nobility; the title- page of Moreno's book has the slogan Las Letras y las armas dan Nobleza Conservala el Valor y la Riqueza. Indeed Moreno says that all doctors, masters and licentiates of the universities of Salamanca, Valla- dolid, Alcala de Henares and Bologna enjoyed the full privileges of nobility, while those of other universities had such privileges, except the fiscal immunities. 2 There was some dispute as to the nobility of doctors in France, but it was generally recognized in some form—in Provence it was transmitted to their children, in Dauphine and Normandy it was only personal. 3 Most cathedral chapters in Germany accepted doctorates as the equivalent to proofs of nobility. The English accepted university graduates as gentry. In many countries nobles enjoyed preferential treat- ment at universities and were often excused part of the requirements for degrees. Although a good many nobles in addition to those intending to enter the church did attend universities and colleges, there was hostility between letrados and robe, the nobilities of privilege and office in Spain and France, on the one hand, and the nobles of lineage. This is equally apparent in Moreno's diatribes and in Loyseau's 'the insolence of minor country gentlemen is so great... that it is impossible to live in peace with t h e m . . . they are birds of prey whose only occupation . . . is to live off others and to persecute each other'. He includes graduates and officers of justice and finance in the Third Estate, remarking that officers formerly came from the nobility as in Rome, but that French nobles 'despise letters and embrace idleness '.* This has yet to be confirmed by systematic research, though some French nobles spoke as though knowledge of Latin was almost a derogation. The French seem to have gone further than most countries in providing special academies for nobles which concen- trated on fencing, riding, dancing, writing and elementary mathematics applied to surveying and fortification, without any Latin. Paradoxically this owed something to a humanist tradition, supported by Vives and 1 E. Hempel, Baroque Art and Architecture in Central Europe (1965), pp. io, 28, 31. Fo. 16. Fray Juan Benito Guardiola's Tratado de Nobleza . . . (Madrid, 1595) does not seem to allow this to graduates of other universities. » G.-A. de la Roque, Traite de la Noblesse . . . (Rouen, 1678), Chapter 42. 4 Loyseau, Traite'... pp. 57, 95-9. 22 1 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION others, which stressed the educational value of the mechanical arts. Most nobles in Poland, Austria, Hungary and many parts of Germany must have known Latin, since it was an officially spoken, as well as written language, for many lay purposes. In general the more really poor nobles there were, the more numerous ill-educated ones were likely to be. Even in France the situation was more complex than Loyseau's re- marks might imply. Some high robe families had genuine noble origins, they all usually owned land and seigneurial rights so that they had com- mon interests with the rural nobles. In Bavaria the lesser nobility became more intermingled with the urban patriciates; many families became office-holders in the court and administration of the dukes and electors and some rose by this means into the ranks of the higher nobility. 1 Nevertheless there was a general tendency from the sixteenth century onwards for the older nobility to try to close their ranks and enforce distinctions between themselves and the newly ennobled. In France this took the form of sweeping demands for abolition of sale of office and reservation of certain offices, or a proportion of them, for nobles. These were unsuccessful, but from 1600 onwards the crown did make increasing efforts to check usurpation of noble status, though these were often unpopular with the lesser nobles. In Spain there was a hardening of attitudes against the newly privileged so that by the mid-seventeenth century those without noble parents and grandparents were excluded from the military orders and from the municipalities of Madrid and some other cities where there was a monopoly of government by nobles. 2 In Westphalia the urban patriciate of the larger towns had been very little behind the lesser nobility in social esteem and had intermarried with them in the fifteenth century. By the later sixteenth century there was a marked cleavage between them, with the nobles attempting to exclude the patricians from the Landtag and the chapter of Munster. 3 While most of the pressure in these directions came from the poorer nobles, it was the rich nobles, the magnates (not all of them from old families), who were most successful in maintaining or increasing their power and wealth in most countries during the seventeenth century. Rules about derogation hurt poor nobles by restricting their choice of occupa- tion, without inconveniencing rich ones, just as special laws of entail were only of use to those with adequate lands to settle. The most impor- tant and universal inheritance of poor nobles were the conceptions of blood, lineage and honour. In practice their best means of enforcing some sort of solidarity and equality among all nobles, whatever their rank or wealth, was through notions of honour, enforced by the duel. A noble 1 F. W. Euler, in Deutscher Adel 1430-1555, ed. H. Rdssler (Darmstadt, 1965), pp. 91-2. Dominguez Ortiz, La sociedad espaHola en el sigh XVII, Vol. 1 (Madrid, 1963), pp. 195. 258. • G. Theuerkauf in Deutscher Adel, pp. 160-71. 8 23 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR could only refuse a challenge and still preserve his reputation, if the chal- lenger was not noble. The rise of the duel accompanied the decline of the tournament. In the thirteenth century the tournament had been realistic, bloody and relatively cheap. A poor knight could compete and make his name. Fifteenth- and sixteenth-century tournaments were so expensive as to become largely the preserve of princes, their favourites and mag- nates. The duel was cheap and deadly and put the poor noble on a genuine equality with the rich. A man could make a reputation (however dubious in the eyes of moralists and clerical or lay authority) with his sword. Buckingham may have been the last practitioner of the tourna- ment in England and it seems to have died out all over Europe in this period. Manege, the management of great horses, was the fashionable conspicuous expenditure of the rich, usually requiring indoor riding schools; its relevance to warfare is dubious, but it has left its mark on equestrian portraits. The duel on the point of honour seems to have developed in France from the early sixteenth century and produced a distinctive code which had absolute force in controlling the behaviour and reputation of nobles. It is generally thought to have originated in Italy and clearly owed much to the rules about duels and challenges between soldiers which receive so much attention in treatises on martial law. By the later sixteenth cen- tury duelling was a distinctive feature of the behaviour of nobles all over Europe. Francis I and Henri II had tried to control duels by reviving judicial combat, Henri IV by prohibiting them, unless they had explicit permission, while his successors tried to prohibit them absolutely, as did James I in England and the Spanish Kings. A chorus of jurists and divines supported such prohibitions, which were particularly ineffective in this period, though duels became less frequent in Spain and France in the later seventeenth century. Yet Bodin had said 'the Prince can dispose of a subject's life and goods, but has no power over his honour'. Here we have a code of conduct which was in direct defiance of the rules laid down by church and state and of course with the tradition which identified true nobility with virtue. If there is an impression that more duels were fought in France than else- where, the conception of honour was certainly of the greatest importance in Spanish life and literature. It is convenient to concentrate on Spain, because the conception has been much analysed there, but this does not imply that it was unimportant elsewhere. '"Honour" and "dishonour" depend upon the consciousness of the individual; "fame" and "infamy" upon that of society.' Honour is equated with life and dishonour with death, for infamy is a social death. Hence the essential proposition of the code of honour is that honour is more valuable than life, or that life without honour is impossible. Hence the obligation to accept any chal- lenge from an appropriate challenger, to punish verbal insults, give the 24 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION lie. To refuse is to accept infamy or social death. Yet, as Caro Baroja points out, there were Castilian proverbs which took a different line: 'most honour, most pain', 'honour alone is a poor inheritance', 'between honour and wealth, the last is first'. 1 (We may add there were similar English and French proverbs.) A further complication in the Spanish situation was limpieza, the idea of being dishonoured by the possession of Moorish or Jewish blood, or by an ancestor condemned by the In- quisition. Although it is true that the imposition of the rules about limpieza was popular, since many peckeros were 'pure', while many noble families were 'tainted', it can also be seen as a move by poor nobles against the rich ones whose blood was more likely to be 'tainted'. The duty to kill to defend honour or avenge dishonour was a major theme in Spanish plays, including those of the highly religious Calderon. This and the fact that the plays as printed and performed were licensed and approved by the church has led some to argue that the code expressed in the plays was accepted in ordinary life and approved by casuists in dealing with actual conduct. But it can be shown that the essential pro- position that honour is more important than life was rejected by many casuists, though they agreed that honour and reputation were more valuable than property. The dramatists themselves may have used the imperatives of this code as a convention of proven popularity with their audiences rather than as a serious account of real life. 2 Most authorities condemned duelling, but some Spanish and Italian casuists thought it could be justifiable and at least one Spanish casuist accepted the right of nobles to kill commoners who persisted in repeating insults to their honour. 3 Loyseau savagely regarded the propensity of French nobles towards duelling as an 'attribute of divine providence so that as in nature the most dangerous animals exterminate each other so does our nobility which is not only the most valiant, but also the most violent and insolent in the world'. Nobles had to be prepared to use force against each other in order to live honourably and to some extent their living and status might depend on the use of force against others. If their status and privileges were generally acknowledged by the rest of society, poor nobles were more likely to have to assert their claims to recognition and precedence per- sonally, while rich ones could leave it to their clients or servants. To a greater or lesser extent most societies connived at the revenging of sup- posed insults to nobles by commoners, whether to the point of murder as sometimes happened in Spain or Prague, or the beatings or mutilations by noblemen's servants with which French writers might be threatened 1 J. Caro Baroja, 'A historical account of several conflicts', in Honour and Shame, ed. J. Peristiany (1965), pp. 81-137. * C. A. Jones, 'Honour in Spanish Golden Age Drama', Bull. Hispanic Studies, Vol. 35 (1958), pp. 199-210. * Dominguez Ortiz, La sociedad espaHola . . . , p. 286. 25 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR and which occasionally happened. But the naked use of force in order to secure power and livelihood were still part of the way of life of many nobles in south-western France, whether in leading peasants against tax- collectors, or maintaining possession of disputed lands and levying illegal dues. 1 Alliances between bandits and nobles in order to exploit peasants and travellers had been traditional in sixteenth-century Cata- lonia, in the papal states, Naples and Sicily. Such habits died out in Cata- lonia after about 1618 and among the Roman nobility in the late sixteenth century, but they continued in Naples and Sicily. There it was not just a matter of poor nobles sharing profits with bandits, but of the use of out- laws and bandits to intimidate communes and their elected officials; if need be, murdering those who resisted the illegal demands of a local magnate. Fynes Moryson, whose personal observations were made in the 1590s, provides some comparative impressions of the incidence of violence in the social life of nobles. He considered that among the Germans few were killed or seriously hurt in combat, owing to their peaceable nature and lack of taking offence. This he contrasted not only with France, but also with England, where men 'being most impatient of reproaches and the law giving ridiculous satisfactions for injuries by word and all wrongs, excepting maimes, it hath been accounted a disgracefull course to seeke remedy that way and most injuries have commonly been revenged by the Sword in single combat. . . \ Because the law again gave no satisfaction for words, quarrels and brawls were frequent in Holland. He found few single combats in Italy, the original home of duelling, as premeditated murder for revenge was more usual. In Prague' . . . manslaughters com- mitted by Gentlemen against strangers and those of meaner condition are much more frequent [than in Germany] because Gentlemen can only be judged in Parliament [the Estates] which are not often called and are then tried by Gentlemen who are partiall in the cause and commonly acquit or delude Justice by delaies . . .'. The greatest contrast was in Switzerland, where the law was severe against brawls and provided satis- factions so that even among soldiers there were few murders;' all bystanders are bound to keep the peace and a man who kills another can only escape capital punishment if he can prove self-defence'. Nevertheless the wearing of swords was more widespread than in most countries. Another comparison which rightly interested Moryson was that between enjoyment of hunting rights in different countries. He considered that there was more hunting of deer and more hawking in England and Scotland and that the English gentry had many more parks for keeping deer than elsewhere in Europe. He rightly pointed out that in most parts of Germany 'all Hunting is forbidden to any but absolute Princes in their 1 Y.-M. Bercd, 'La Noblesse rurale . . . sous Louis XIII', Annales du Midi (1964), pp. 44-59. 26 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION own territories', except hunting of 'hurtful beasts', such as foxes and wolves, 'only in some parts the Hunting of Hares is permitted to Gentle- men, as in Saxony... '.In Denmark nobles could only hunt 'in their own grounds of inheritance', elsewhere only the king could hunt. The higher nobility in Bohemia had full huntingrights over their lands. There, in Saxony and other parts of Germany, the unauthorized killing of deer and wild boar, even though they were spoiling crops, was punishable by death, while he claimed that in Austria the lords' leave was needed to kill sparrows. In Flanders nobles had the right to hunt hares, pheasants and partridges, whereas in Holland and Friesland partridges and seafowl were taken by the vulgar. Moryson thought Italy unsuited to hunting and saw very little going on there and in Poland. Although there was a great deal in France, they hunted in the open fields and had few parks, while only great men could afford to keep hawks. Moryson only saw hawking once in Poland and once in Bohemia 'never ells . . . I did in any place see any exercise either of Hunting or Hawking which so frequently offers itself to passengers neere the high wayes of England' which . . . 'hath more fallow Deer than all Europe. No Kingdom in the World hath so many Dovehouses.' Again the great exception is Switzerland where 'Hunting . . . is free for all men, they having few gentlemen . . . In like manner all sorts of men have freedom to fish in all rivers, brooks or lakes, being in the Territories of their particular Cantons or Commonwealths. And like freedom have they to hawke and take all kinds of birds by nets and like Arts . . . u . In fact the rights of non-nobles to hunt in France had been finally abolished in the sixteenth century, except in the case of wolves and foxes. In England property qualifications for keeping dogs, ferrets or nets and for using guns or bows for hunting were imposed in 1606 and penalties on poaching were increased. Moryson makes other observations which, though doubtless subjec- tive, are of general interest. He found the 'French use great liberty of conversation and small reverence to superiors', despising English gentle- men for wearing great lords' liveries 'even for a festival day' and giving them so much deference. French visitors in their turn were struck by the ceremoniousness of the English court, compared with that of Henri IV. Moryson remarked that in English inns gentlemen expected to eat in their chambers or sit at table only with gentry, whereas in Germany commoners sat at the same table, but lower down, receiving poorer service for the same price. He thought the Germans used their wives as servants, but did not 'exact respect from their children' who 'shake hands with them instead of raising their hats and asking blessing on their knees as in England'. He also marvelled that 1 Moiyson, An Itinerary (1617), pp. 85,148,151,169,200,221-2, 261, 287; Shakespeare's Europe, ed. C. Hughes (1903), pp. 159, 354-5, 367, 387, 397, 468; Corpus Christi Coll., Oxford, MS 94, fos. 215, 538-9, 544, 646. 27 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR the Gentlemen howsoever sometimes learned yet proudly despise Graduates of the University, no less or more than Merchants which I found not onely by common practice, but also by my private experience. For conversing with a Gentleman, he perceiving I spake Latin better than he thought became a Gentleman, asked me how long I did study in the University... [and] did after esteem me as a Pedant... Moryson wondered that, despite 'Gentlemen first rising by learning, warfare and traffic, they only judge warfare worthy to raise and continue Gentlemen . . . ' . We might guess that these were the prejudices of lesser and poorer nobles. For it is certain that many Austrian and German nobles were well educated and that they had a distinctive culture based on knowledge not only of Latin, but also of modern Romance languages. It has been said that the basic works of that culture were Cicero's De Officiis, Petrarch's Canzoniere and Ariosto's Orlando Furioso and that the dominant tone of European culture derived from the patronage and tastes of nobles and courts, to which non-noble readers and writers largely conformed, or aspired. 1 While there is much truth in this, yet proverbial wisdom and long- standing ethical and religious traditions contradicted or were sceptical of noble values. However, though literature, art and proverbial lore may mostly reflect noble or peasant ways of life, the lack of much explicit literary concern with the ways of life of bourgeois and artisans does not show that these did not have distinctive values and cultures of their own. The evangelists of both Protestantism and the Counter-Reformation dis- approved of popular magical superstitions and of both popular and noble tastes for bloody and adulterous chivalric romances. The first great picaresque novel Guzman de Alfarache was a deliberate moralizing alter- native to these romances, 'a "truthful" literature in response to the ex- plicit demands of the Counter-Reformation'. 2 Yet if the moral intention wore thin in Aleman's successors the success of the new genre did not in fact transform popular taste: 'novels of chivalry... were reprinted in the form of chap-books, until very near our own times and . . . especially in the south of Spain . . . were the favourite reading of drovers and farm hands . . .'. In France chap-books based on the Charlemagne romances were also a staple of popular reading throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Such works presented a mythical medieval society and were almost exclusively concerned with the deeds of kings and nobles and a perpetual crusade against the infidel. French popular literature presented a world of myth and miracles, of saints, giants and magic which was alien not only to the general trend of intellectual development among the learned, but also to the humanistic elements in the ideal and actual education of nobles. Spanish popular literature seems to have been 1 O. Brunner, Adelines Landleben und Europaischer Ceist (Salzberg, 1949); Neue Wege der Sozialgeschichte (GQttingen, 1956), 'Osterreichische Adelsbibliotheken'. 1 A. A. Parker, Literature and the Delinquent (Edinburgh, 1967), p. 22. 28 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION peculiar in that influence of oral tradition was much stronger on 'official literature' than in France or England, particularly on verse plays. More Spanish chap-books were probably in verse and they certainly included more poems from well-known writers and more adaptations of their plays and stories. 1 Thus, small as the numbers of nobles were in proportion to the rest of the population, attitudes deriving from their culture not only influenced the literature and art of the educated but also that accessible to the un- educated. If Corneille's plays have heroes who embodied stoic and chivalric virtues of ideal nobles, supported by pride and the quest for glory, they also share with the chap-books' romances the justification of noble rebellions against injustice and tyranny. But however widespread its influence this culture, sympathetic to the ideals of the nobility, did not enjoy an undisputed monopoly; the Christian, medieval and humanistic traditions all had elements which were hostile to its assumptions and which still survived in the writings of divines, jurists and moralists. Moreover the economic interests and political aspirations of great and poor nobles might differ considerably. The conventions and legal rules about derogatory occupations, personal service, or living nobly, also differed appreciably between different countries. The ideals of the nobility, tacitly and explicitly expressed in their own behaviour and culture, might conflict with many of the realities of everyday life, but they also strongly influenced the cultural ideals of much of the rest of the population, espe- cially through plays and chap-books. Such conflicts and contrasts grew stronger as a result of royal policies and fiscal necessities. There was pressure to reduce noble fiscal privileges and excesses of duelling, but more important and more general were the sales of titles and privileges of nobility and of royal rights of jurisdiction and taxation over local communities. There was an almost universal tendency for great nobles, who included some men or families recently risen to greatness, to con- solidate or maintain their power as a group and for lesser ones to become more dependent upon serving kings or magnates for their survival, less able to pursue effectively and independently their own political and social aims. The European nobilities were economically heterogeneous groups of diverse origins. Although all accepted ideologies which proclaimed that they ought either to be closed groups, or at worst groups which co-opted new members according to strict rules, reality was different. In most countries many, perhaps most noble families had been recruited by prescription, often in defiance of legal rules, and such recruitment con- tinued. This produced paradoxical situations; perhaps the most extreme 1 Baroja, 'A historical account...', in Honour and Shame, pp. 113, 116; R. Mandrou, De la culture populaire au rje et i8e siecles (1964); E. M. Wilson, Some Aspects 0/ Spanish Literary History (Oxford, 1966). 29 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR was that in Poland, where the king could not create new nobles without the consent of the Diet, yet the Diet made no serious attempt to control or prevent recruitment by prescription so that by 1630 thousands of cases of usurpation of nobility were alleged. 1 It was in absolutist France that the strictest efforts were made to control the acquisition of nobility by pres- cription. These were particularly vigorous from the late 1650s and the lesser nobility of some regions attempted organized protest and resistance. The state was always the most serious potential or actual competitor of the nobles, whether in trying to assert its own monopoly of violence and power, or in competing with them in exploiting rural populations and in some cases urban ones. The divisions of the spoils and power and their stability naturally varied in different countries. The forces affecting policies and political arrangements also varied, but every- where, except in Holland and Zeeland in the northern Netherlands, the Swiss cantons and the duchy of Wurttemberg, the nobility remained an important social and political group. In most of Europe, whether under limited or absolute monarchies they still formed the most important group in terms of prestige. But everywhere there were other self-consciously organized social groupings, even in the aristocratic republics of Venice and Poland. By risking insecure generalizations and sweeping comparisons, we may be able to see some of the distinctive common features of European societies. In sixteenth- and seventeenth-century China there were also considerable discrepancies between the legal rules and cultural conventions concerning the status of occupations and reality; for instance mercantile wealth and military success were in theory little esteemed, but in fact gave access to power and prestige. The privileged elite, the shen-shih, with then- wives and children, were perhaps two to three per cent of the population in the seventeenth century and were recruited by examination, purchase and success in military affairs. Their privileges were conferred because they were actual or potential officials, but for the great majority they were not hereditary, though the sons of the privileged and wealthy had a much better chance of acquiring privileged status than those of com- moners. Their variety of origins, great discrepancies in wealth and power and the fact that many were landowners make the shen-shih roughly com- parable as a privileged group with the European nobility in the inclusive sense used here. Although social mobility measured in terms of access of commoners to official positions was less in seventeenth-century China than under the early Ming, it may well have been greater than in Europe in the sense that there may have been more opportunities, though still very limited ones, to rise from the peasantry. In fact there is no informa- tion yet available either about rates at which commoners entered Europe's 1 J. Bardach, in Gouvernis et Gouvernants, Recueils de la Soc. J. Bodin, Vol. xxv (1965), p. 281. 30 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION privileged groups, or about downward mobility, remotely comparable to that for China. 1 But it is clear that there was considerable upward and downward mobility among European nobilities, especially in the larger ones such as Poland's. If downward mobility was facilitated by lack of primogeniture in China (though clan custom did not always favour equal partition), extinction in the male line was facilitated by lack of polygamy in Europe. The most important differences seem to be in the relationships of social groups to the state, the extent to which they could acquire power and prestige independently of the state and the extent to which the state apparatus could control the life of communities. If access to the centre of power may have been more open in China, the government exercised a more monolithic monopoly of power and pro- pagated a more uniform officially approved culture. There may be dis- tortion through concentrating on the intentions and working of govern- ments of China, where 'history was written by officials for officials' so that the sources concentrate on the workings of bureaucracy rather than of society. Nevertheless there were many centres of power in Europe, simply because there were many states, while within each state there were groups corporately conscious of rights, either specifically conceded by or customarily entrenched against it. Conflicting explanations were avail- able; for some theorists of natural law, like Suarez, and for all defenders of absolutism the authority of communities derived from the state, for Althusius and his followers the state was a federation or even confedera- tion of communities. In China, towns were primarily the seats of admini- stration by officials of a central government which exercised more control than the most absolute European monarchy. European towns usually enjoyed a more indirect relationship with central authorities which recog- nized their corporate privileges and identities. If their independence had generally declined since the Middle Ages and if their militias were now unable to defend them in serious warfare, they were still important for preventing popular disturbances and the excesses which the passage of friendly troops inflicted on the countryside. Even in absolute monarchies towns were often still left with discretion as to the means by which they raised some of the taxes imposed. In the Standestaat as it survived in the Habsburg lands, most of Germany, Poland and the southern Netherlands, administration was shared between officials some of whom were only responsible to the ruler and others to the estates. The tutelage of more centralized administrations over local communities was growing generally, particularly in France, but it never entirely effaced their traditions and in many ways local oligarchies grew stronger. The status of village com- 1 W. Eberhard, Social Mobility in Traditional China (Leiden, 1962); R. M. Marsh, The Mandarins; The Circulation of Elites in China 1600-1900 (Glencoe, 1961); Ping-ti Ho, The Ladder of Success in Imperial China (1962); J. M. Menzel (ed.), The Chinese Civil Service (Boston, 1963). 31 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR munities varied, but they often did enjoy some corporate identity, recognized by rulers and seigneurs, though usually much less effective independence than towns, except in some mountainous regions. Some were controlled and exploited by towns, especially in Spain, Italy and Switzerland, though almost everywhere many more were controlled by seigneurs. For fiscal reasons higher authorities found it convenient to deal with village assemblies, or elected representatives, who could bind the community by their acts. Village syndics and assemblies survived as legal entities over much of Europe. (They existed in some English villages, but not as a general pattern fostered by central authority as in France, though they did become generalized in the township meetings of New England.) Their recognition was due mainly to their serving the convenience of others, but such institutions also served their mem- bers' purposes in regulating use of commons, waste, fallows, disposal of garbage and so on and, if need be, by collective litigation and agreements. Chinese local government was highly centralized and left little discre- tion or initiative to officials: in theory the same was true of local finances, though in fact the fees and perquisites of officials were not effectively con- trolled. The non-official privileged elite were the spokesmen of local interests, but they had no legally defined role. Indeed they were forbidden to form associations, meddle in administration, petition on behalf of commoners or to publish essays or choose personal names without official approval. Despite sale of privileges, there were no checks on the government's power to degrade men from privileged status and such penalties were much more frequent in Chinese than in European law. Urban gilds, clans, village headmen and meetings performed important functions with direct or tacit official approval in regulating social life, especially in arbitrating to settle all kinds of disputes and applying local customs, helped by general reluctance to resort to official courts. Villages and towns did not form collective legal entities, created by individuals acting together and recognized by the administration, though they might have informal arrangements for settling their affairs, as long as the government did not choose to intervene. There were no procedures for challenging official decisions within the rules of law acknowledged by the government, as there were in European absolutist states, where litigation about conflicts of jurisdiction, execution of decrees and the assessment of taxes was frequent. In China the check on official action came from within the administration through the censorate, not through litigation; there '. . . the legal system was a system of control (though there were gaps in this) and the distribution of rights was only secondary and incidental'. European courts often performed administrative and police functions in this period, but in China judicial functions were part of the repressive duties of administrators; even for the privileged groups 'legal 32 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION involvement was something to be feared and avoided' and there was extreme reluctance wholly to acquit a defendant. 1 From the sixteenth century Christianity became less plausible in its universalist aspirations, more ambiguous and contradictory in its public prescriptions, not only because Christians were becoming identified with Europeans, but also because of the splits caused by the Reformation. Protestants and Catholics shared a common and continuing theological and intellectual inheritance, incorporating the old methods of Aristotelian scholasticism, together with newer ones of humanistic rhetoric and of critical or even comparative study of Roman law. Within the Catholicism of the Counter-Reformation there were conflicting views of man's place in the world; the Christian stoicism of Lipsius exalted human reason and ancient wisdom which Berulle condemned as delusions and pride of those naturally wretched, ignorant and sinful. The religious orders themselves were divided by choices between hierarchical and missionary conceptions of the church. The growth of scepticism, the ' new Pyrrhon- ism', in the later sixteenth century did not involve any immediate breach with religion, since it mainly provided another weapon in the apologetics of relevation. Nevertheless in so far as it was used publicly to attack rational theology and support fideism, or privately by libertins to put all revealed religions on an equal footing, it did face even the most orthodox with intellectual choices. Thus long before the 'new philosophy' had provided a new cosmology, still less had much impact on education or the universities, European scholars were forced to consider alternative ways of interpreting their religion and legal and political institutions and had to choose between alternative methods of organizing and interpreting knowledge. If this was true within the major religious confessions or within the officially approved universities of one country, within European culture taken as a whole the available choices and possible conflicts were naturally much greater. The monolithic character of Chinese culture can doubtless be exag- gerated and the Taoist tradition had enduring importance as an unofficial alternative. Nevertheless the official culture and ideology appear to have been much more successful in presenting universal and unambiguous precepts and interpretations, public discussion and criticism of which was more severely restricted and politically dangerous, though a private life of religious contemplation or intellectual dissent might be possible. The seventeenth century saw in the' School of Han Learning' the development of 'a discipline of historical and textual criticism' which led to the rejec- tion of large parts of the official canonical writings' as being interpolated, 1 E. Balazs, Chinese Civilization and Bureaucracy (1964); Ch'tt T'ung-Tsu, Local Govern- ment in China under the CM ing (Harvard, 1962); Kung-Chuan Hsiao, Rural China; Imperial Control in the Nineteenth Century (i960); S. van der Sprenkel, Legal Institutions in Manchu China (1962), p. 128; D. Bodde and C. Morris, Law in Imperial China (Harvard, 1967), p. 197. 33 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR altered, not genuine, or intentionally falsified'. There was also a great deal of colloquial literature which was regarded officially and with justification as subversive. The common denominator of these move- ments of criticism and reform and of their immediate failure has been seen as anti-absolutism. 1 The ideal of official Confucianism seemed to see the state as indistinguishable from society. This continued domination by a rigidly defined official ideology can be seen partly as a response to the needs of controlling and colonizing a vast area whose populations were originally ethnically and culturally distinct, and whose speech and environments were still very different. The desire to unite Europe in some similar fashion had not entirely vanished by the seventeenth century. If after 1600 the greatest successes eventually went to small states, the United Provinces, Sweden and ulti- mately England, so that to us this seems a distinctive feature of the century, it was not only Utopian advocates of universal monarchy, such as Campanella, or those with millenarian expectations, such as Comenius, who foresaw a very different future for Europe. At a less visionary level, from the Battle of the White Mountain down to at least the Peace of Prague (1635) the possibility of a refashioning of the empire under the emperor's effective domination and of a Habsburg hegemony over continental Europe seemed far greater than at any time since Charles V's victories at Pavia or Miihlberg. There were still those like Guillen de la Camera who believed that after Nordlingen the Spanish Empire would endure for ever, or like Fray Benito de Pefialosa who rejoiced at the depopulation of Spain, caused by her divine mission to defend and propagate the faith. Fear and hatred of the Jews and Jewish blood seemed to increase Spaniards' determination to see themselves as a chosen race, characteristics they shared with militant Calvinists. A courtly sonnet hailed Philip IV as the hero who would free Asia, destroy heresy, inaugurate the universal rule of perfect law, un Solo Pastor y un solo Imperio? Our knowledge of what was to be tends to discount the reality of such fears and hopes, encourages us to believe that all real prospects of Habs- burg hegemony had died with Philip II. Similarly the undoubted progress of Catholic restoration by 1600 can be too easily accepted as making the religious settlements of 1648 and later inevitable. Yet from a more immediate point of view the later sixteenth century was equally remarkable for the fact that the rulers of Poland, Austria, Bohemia, Hungary and France had been forced to abandon the enforcement of Catholic uni- formity and to allow de facto or formal rights to dissidents. If the Counter- 1 E. Balazs, Political Theory and Administrative Reality in Traditional China (1965), pp. 5-29. 2 O. H. Green, Spain and the Western Tradition, Vol. rv (1966), pp. 5-9, 14-16. 34 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION Reformation had already made considerable progress in Germany and Poland by 1600, it was the Habsburg victories after 1618 which made the Bohemian lands, Austria and ultimately Hungary safe for Catholicism and provided conditions which assisted the growth of Catholic intolerance in Poland. The Rome of Urban VIII and Bernini was the cultural and spiritual capital of those lands reconquered for Catholicism. Yet when Santa Maria della Vittoria was built to commemorate the White Mountain still greater conquests seemed possible, but by the time the culminating splendour of the new Rome, Bernini's Piazza of St Peter's, was begun in 1656, such hopes had already gone. Nevertheless in 1635 when the Hall of the Realms at the new Buen Retiro Palace at Madrid was first displayed, its iconography celebrated more than the mere survival of the Spanish monarchy under the leadership of Olivares, and catalogued what were to have been definitive victories over heresy from Bahia to Switzerland. The fears of then obscure provincials, such as Pym and Cromwell, were not necessarily delusions of Protestant fervour, exploited by the propaganda of Richelieu or the defeated Camerarius. Both Bernini's Rome and the Hall of the Realms were built to celebrate triumphs which were not to be, but which were not necessarily impossible. This was a Europe where there were nations with God-given destinies, though not nation-states. Everywhere men were told that all political authority was sacred, that all rulers were responsible to God. If there was dispute about the nature and amount of authority which God had given them over their subjects, there was agreement that royal authority was a kind of personal property. As legitimate kings, unlike tyrants, were bound to respect the property rights of their subjects, so their subjects must respect the rights of kings. With the exception of Poland and the empire, the elective and explicitly contractual elements in European monarchies had weakened during the sixteenth century and this trend culminated in the conversion of conquered Bohemia to what now seemed the normal and proper form of hereditary succession. Attempts by kings to settle details of government by their last wills, as magnates might settle the management of their estates, were often frustrated by assemblies, courts or councils. This also happened in France where absolutist theories interpreted fundamental law more and more narrowly until by the early seventeenth century only the law regulating monarchial succession was outside the scope of the king's sovereign power. But if the king's inheri- tance of his crown was analogous to the subject's right to inherit property, then the pursuit of dynastic interests and inheritances were as legitimate as the subject's enjoyment of his property rights. Externally the concep- tion of inalienable property rights possessed by kings or dynasties was both a practical and legalistic stumbling block to universalist aspirations. Internally kings' and subjects' property rights did conflict. Perhaps the most serious conflicts arose in war, whether fought for dynastic interests 35 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR or merely defensively. Then all kings and states invoked emergency powers, to over-ride normal customary or legal procedures which implied some regulation of or consent to taxes, forced loans, or requisitions and so encroached upon their subjects' property rights, which all agreed it was a main purpose of society and government to protect. Even after 1618 most kings spent more time in hunting than in leading armies or directing wars, though state portraits might show the un- military Philip IV and Charles I in equestrian postures of command. James I, though devoted to hunting, was untypical in his wish to be remembered as a peacemaker. The iconography of Rubens' Triumph of Peace, planned in the early 1620s for the Banqueting House at Whitehall, commemorates hopes and achievements more unfounded than, and as ephemeral as those in the Hall of the Realms, but expected the union of Christendom by very different means. 1 Rubens' ceiling symbolizes more than James' failures in foreign policy, for his inability to pay for it reminds us of the failure of most European states to reform their finances and administrations effectively during the two decades of comparative peace and prosperity before 1620. Those decades were not particularly peaceful around the Baltic and were neither peaceful nor prosperous in the Muscovy of the Time of Troubles. They were also a time of disaster for the Ottomans; revolts in the Balkans and throughout Anatolia were followed by defeats by the Persians. The major immediate cause of Ottoman difficulties was the earlier Persian war which they had ended victoriously in 1590. 2 Similarly war or civil war had strained the govern- ments and resources of Spain, France, the Netherlands, England and the Habsburg lands. By 1609 all these states were faced with the need to revivify their ordinary means of peacetime administration and above all to restore their finances. Most governments wished to restore or increase their authority in ecclesiastical affairs. This might mean trying to increase the effectiveness of national churches by trying to settle disputes and grievances concerning them, as in France or England. All states, with the exception of Transyl- vania, aspired to religious uniformity, not diversity, as their ideal and many were increasingly repressive towards dissenters. In the sixteenth century secular encroachments on church property happened every- where. Even in Spain, where there were no direct Protestant threats, the crown sold and exploited church lands and rights. By contrast the seventeenth century saw the church generally recovering or even increas- ing its property. In most countries serious threats of secularization and alienation, or resistance to paying tithes, diminished and had virtually ceased by 1660. The main secular demands on the churches' wealth were taxes and contributions to pay for wars. Governments certainly tried to 1 Per Palme, Triumph of Peace (1957), pp. 260-2. • See Vol. m in this series, pp. 371-6 and below, Chapter xx, p. 626. 36 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION increase these, but in so far as they had become more explicitly committed to defend ecclesiastical property and authority in its traditional forms this limited the expedients available for dealing with debts and fiscal problems. By 1610 it might have seemed that France had solved and England was about to solve their immediate financial problems and that Spain would make some concerted attempt to deal with hers. By 1621 it was apparent that they had not; in all three countries ordinary revenue did not cover actual expenditure, governments' debts were large and their credit poor. The countries which seemed to be stronger financially were the United Provinces, Denmark and Sweden. Sweden's achievement was the more remarkable since it took place during almost continuous and not always successful war, but in the long run, though Sweden's administration and power were effectively transformed, her pursuit of security and Baltic interests proved beyond her financial resources. The country where there was most discussion about the plight of the economy and the govern- ment's finances and least done to remedy them was Spain. The only problem which Philip III chose to tackle was the unreal, if highly emotive one, of the Moriscos. Their expulsion (1609-14) was approved by the church, the Inquisition and the mass of Castilians against the opposition of the nobility and wealthier townsmen of the kingdoms of Valencia and Aragon. This can be seen as a last stage in making Spain and its culture closed and inward-looking, concerned above all to defend its purity and honour, a process whose sixteenth-century landmarks had included the rejection of Erasmian influences and the prohibition of studies abroad. More immediately it may have been an attempt to conciliate Castilians at the expense of Aragonese interests for the failure of the peace to lighten their fiscal burdens. What is certain is that it ruined much of Valencia's economy immediately, while ultimately stimulating even greater French immigration into Aragon and exacerbating the general difficulties already caused by rural depopulation and lack of man-power. In 1615 Philip Ill's total expenditure was more than in 1608 and not more than ten per cent below the highest years of the 1590s, when the crown's receipts from American silver had been twice as great and the yield of Castile's taxes much higher. Yet reforms comparable to Sully's were possible in Philip Ill's dominions, as the count of Lemos showed in Naples (1610-16). In 1612 there was a deficit of 1,600,000 ducats, over half the average receipts. This was cut by reducing interest on debts, by more efficient accounting and collection, by increasing rents of tax-farms and by raising new customs duties and an extraordinary donativo. Ordinary expenditure was reduced, revenues were reallocated, most of them going to a new department the Cassa Militare, which, as assigned annuities and rents fell in, should have an increasing surplus which would pay off the 10,000,000 debt, whose interest was 800,000 ducats a year. By 37 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR 1616 the deficit equalled the amount of interest, but Lemos' successor, the aggressive Osuna, 1 rapidly undid his achievements. By 1621 the deficit was nearly 4,000,000, the debt perhaps 20,000,000 ducats and the economy had been severely shaken by devaluations in 1617, 1618 and 1620. 2 In England and France anticipations and assignments had eroded ordinary revenues and ensured permanent deficits so that nominally short-term debts were often left unpaid to the detriment of royal credit. The Notables in 1627 were told that the French deficit had long averaged some 5,000,000 to 6,000,000 livres a year, despite considerable increases in indirect taxation, sales of offices and other expedients. This was due to the expenses of civil war and of pensions and rewards to magnates. Louis XIII, unlike Philip III, Philip IV, James I and Charles I, proved capable of controlling and reducing the expenses of his court and house- hold, though reforming statesmen, like Sully, Cranfield, Olivares, Riche- lieu, or Strafford still expected substantial rewards for themselves and their creatures. Not that more austerity and less magnificence by courts and governments would necessarily have changed the course of inter- national relations and of economic and commercial developments. But in so far as there was a general failure by states to maintain or increase their financial strength down to 1620, when international and economic cir- cumstances were relatively favourable, of which the most extreme example is the conduct of Philip III and Lerma, this restricted their freedom of action in conducting war and foreign policy and so influenced the character of the war. While the great debasements and manipulations of coinage in Poland and Germany after 1616 may have economic causes, they were also the result of the greed and financial difficulties of rulers and towns. The governments involved in war after 1618 had less reali- zable, or unmortgaged, fiscal resources than a hundred or even fifty years before. They were more dependent on tax-farmers and financiers. The financial failures of peacetime conditioned the conduct of war most obviously in attempts to make it pay for itself. These were not new, but the contribution systems of Wallenstein, the imperialists and the Swedes were more systematic and longer lasting in their effects. War at sea had always relied on such hopes, but again the activities of the Dutch West India Company and the Dunkirkers were greater and lasted longer. Statesmen, like Richelieu and Olivares, were well aware that to decide on war was to precipitate financial, political and administrative crises, whose outcome was unpredictable, though they hoped to control them. Rulers invoked extraordinary powers to deal with the emergency and once armies were raised, they could, if necessary, be maintained by applying the contribution-system or something like it to their own subjects, over- 1 See below, Chapter DC, pp. 275-6. * G. Galasso, Mezzogiomo medievale e moderno (Turin, 1965),' . . . le finanze napoletane nella prima meta del Seicento' 38 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION riding local authorities and the traditional apparatus of fiscal administra- tion. But once raised, armies and their commanders were not fully con- trollable by their governments at home and still less abroad, arrears of pay and promises of rewards to commanders often meant the failure or pro- longation of peace negotiations, of which the most famous example is the Swedish quest for satisfactio after 1636. If rulers claimed emergency powers and often possessed greater means of asserting them, these threatened both to transform and destroy their governments. Fiscal pressures could produce popular revolts which might directly or indirectly involve the ruling groups of whole provinces. At the same time that emergency administrative and judicial commissions claimed greater power for the state, rulers were often selling off or mortgaging their traditional authority and powers. Sales of offices, jurisdictions, lands, rights, privileges, titles and honours could change the character of ruling groups and their political, economic and social relationships with governments and the rest of the population. The actions of governments seemed to become identi- fied with the interests of tax-farmers, financiers and armies and alien to those of most of their subjects. The war became not so much one of attri- tion, but a gamble as to which tottering conglomeration of alienated local interests and exhausted taxpayers could avoid collapsing for longer than its enemies. The counterpart to this in diplomacy was the general use of that method of 'continual negotiation' which Richelieu made famous. At any given moment one or more of the belligerents had more than usually urgent reasons for making peace. But entering the war in the first place had involved such dangers and losses that the longer it lasted, the more it seemed that there was little more to be lost by gambling on a change of fortune and the difficulties of opponents. As the stakes spent on war grew higher, the more necessary it seemed for the tem- porarily stronger party in the negotiations to secure some real gains, hence the difficulty of reaching any settlement. Initially both Spain and France made some attempt to solve their financial problems by traditional methods of consultation, before turning to more desperate expedients. In willingly accepting the renewal of war in 1621 Olivares was the heir of the imperial past; to find means to fight the war, he had no choice but also to try to be the heir of the arbitristas. The most important part of the latter inheritance was the attempt to restore the economy and the crown's credit by founding a national banking system. Plans for banks managed by municipalities and the crown had been discussed under Philip II; in 1599 the Cortes approved such a scheme and granted taxes on condition that it was implemented. Despite complaints, nothing was done, but after 1617 discussions revived; in 1621 a junta was appointed and at last in 1623 a decree was published. Banks and pawnshops were to be set up in 119 towns and financed by a forced loan of a twentieth from lay and clerical estates over 2,000 ducats, converted into perpetual annuities at 3%. All 39 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR ecclesiastical and charitable foundations were to deposit their funds and the banks would have a monopoly of loans, selling redeemable annuities at 5% and lending at 7%. The Cortes opposed the forced loan and finally only granted taxes on condition that the king financed the banks and withdrew their monopoly of lending (1626). An attempt to set up a Crown banking company in 1627, managed by Italian financiers and chartered to conduct lotteries, deal in foreign exchange and have a mono- poly of censos, was defeated in the same way in 1628 and 1629. 1 These schemes attempted to tackle fundamental problems, even if all that they promised would have been unlikely to happen. Although they would have strengthened the crown's bargaining power with the hated foreign financiers, they offended clergy, nobles, letrados and the richer townsmen. Apart from paying the forced loan, men of property would suffer from the monopoly of lending and control of interest rates. One of Spain's longstanding problems was the strong preference such men showed for censos [redeemable rent charges] against other forms of investment; men even sold land to buy them and the clergy used them extensively. Thus the banks' monopoly would have reduced the income of all holders of censos, because it would eventually become impossible to get a higher return than 5% on any loan. This was expected to stimulate more pro- ductive investments. But the banks were not necessarily attractive to debtors who would have had to pay the normal 7%, while greater nobles had often obtained royal privileges which forced their creditors to accept rates well below this. 2 Thus the Cortes rejected the arbitristas, expressed an explicit preference for increasing indirect taxes 3 and by implication chose the way of debasements and arbitrary expedients. It was also a warning that if the ruling groups of Castile would not accept Olivares' plans, the prospects of the other Iberian kingdoms accepting them were poor. In the long run no one trusted the monarchy to keep its promises and the non-Castilians were unlikely to exchange their relative immunity from the fiscal burdens of empire for promises of the de- Castilianization of its rewards in the Union of Arms. 4 The plans for reforming the French monarchy put to the Assembly of Notables of 1626 were as comprehensive as anything considered by the councils of Castile, and some of them also had long histories. A favourite expedient for improving French finances and credit was the redemption of the alienated rights and lands of the royal demesne. This had been urged by the States General in 1614 and earlier and had actually been begun by Sully. Richelieu wished to raise a forced loan at low interest from the towns and clergy to provide a fund to complete its redemption during the 1 E. J. Hamilton, 'Spanish Banking Schemes before 1700', Journal of Pol. Economy, Vol. Lvn (1949). 2 B. Bennassar, Valladolidau siecle d'or (Paris, 1967), pp. 258-72, 557-67. • Adas de las Cortes de Castillo, Vol. xxxix, pp. 5-20. * See below, Chapter xv, p. 463. 40 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION next six years. The Notables doubted whether any loan would be used for this purpose. Despite Richelieu's promises, they neither accepted his plan nor offered any real remedies for the financial difficulties. However, they did approve the plans for reviving commercial and maritime power, which themselves were in part a reply to Olivares' attempts to achieve the same results. For the time being Richelieu thought it possible to conduct a war or expensive foreign policies, while simultaneously pursuing ad- ministrative reforms and mercantilist plans at home. By 1629 he thought a choice had to be made, and so seems to show better judgment than Olivares, but for Olivares there was no alternative to attempting structural reforms while fighting a war. The attitude of the Cortes of Castile made such an attempt both essential to finance the war and unlikely to succeed. Neither they nor other statesmen could overcome the difficulty that credi- tors would never trust absolute rulers who claimed uncontrolled emer- gency powers to keep long-term financial promises. Before examining how the cost of war was met and its effects, it is worth considering to what extent conditions outside Europe helped to make it possible for so many European states to engage in prolonged warfare and what turning points in the struggle were decisive for changing the distribution of power in Europe. As the Ottomans continued to be distracted by internal dissensions down to 1627 and after that were still concentrating their resources on a renewed war with Persia (1623-39), there was no serious threat to distract the Habsburgs in Hungary. Central and eastern Europe and the Ottomans had turned their backs on each other, apart from border skirmishes, as Spain and the Ottomans had done in the last two decades of the sixteenth century. This also assisted the Poles in expanding into White Russia and above all into the Ukraine, without producing an immediate need for strengthening the military and administrative power of the crown. However, the failure of the Polish kings to defend their Baltic provinces and interests against the Swedes gives a misleading impression of Polish power. Poland was still the greatest military power in eastern Europe, when the nobles chose to unite their forces behind the crown. The Diet refused to support Sigismund Hi's and Ladislas IV's Baltic plans and by treating Ladislas' plans against the Turks in the same way helped to precipitate the Cossack revolt of 1648. But to defend their Ukrainian colonization they raised 100,000 men for the Chocim campaign of 1621 against the Turks and Tartars, and 120,000 against Bohdan Khmelnytsky in 1651. Thus Ottoman weakness after the death of Murad IV indirectly contributed to the eclipse of Poland by encouraging Ladislas' plans. In western Europe power shifted as a result of the renewal of direct conflict between France and Spain. Olivares, looking back after the catastrophe of 1640, thought that Spain's defeats had their origins in the Mantuan war (1628-31). Until then the Habsburgs had been victorious, but viewed from Madrid the 3 41 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008 MHrDECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR situation was unsatisfactory. Spanish money and sometimes Spanish troops had made possible the reconquest of Bohemia and the victories of the Catholic League and Wallenstein in Germany, yet it had proved impossible to get any promise of a general league against the Dutch from either the emperor or the princes, who resented Spain's occupation of the Lower Palatinate. Olivares had also hoped to ruin the Dutch by closing the Baltic to them; by 1628 these plans had been frustrated by the caution of the Hansa towns and Wallenstein's refusal to act under Spain's direc- tion. 1 Wallenstein had second thoughts as a result of his failure at Stralsund, but Madrid had decided (September 1628) to concentrate its resources securing the Mantuan territories. 2 Castile's finances were being put in better order by the forced debt conversion of 1627 which gave financiers juros [annuities] and freed the revenues pledged to them and by the new banking company's devaluation of the inflated copper coinage. The Mantuan territory of Montferrat and Casale's control of a pass to Italy threatened the security of the Milanese and the land-route to the Netherlands, hence Olivares' decision to deny the inheritance to the French duke of Nevers to whom the last duke had willed it when he died at the end of 1627. While there were grounds for disputing the legality of the duke's will, Spain had not appealed to them but to the immediate force of arms. In so doing Spain had flouted dynastic property rights, challenged France and further disturbed her relations with the emperor, since Montferrat was an imperial fief. At the same time important decisions had to be taken about the Netherlands. The Stadholder Frederick Henry was willing to negotiate a renewal of the truce of 1609 which the infanta and Spinola urged should be accepted. But Olivares argued that this would be disastrous to Spain, as it had been before. The Dutch would capture her trade in both the Indies; the cost of fighting the war prevented them from devoting all their resources to increasing their sea-power. The only solution was to win the war by buying the intervention of the emperor and the German princes. Philip IV followed neither course; he allowed negotiations with the Dutch, but set his terms impossibly high, while failing to send the funds necessary for buying support in the empire. The result of Spain and Savoy's occupa- tion of Montferrat and the siege of Casale was not direct French inter- vention, but the sending of an ambassador to Madrid. Both sides wished to avoid an immediate clash, but for different reasons. Time was not on Spain's side. In October La Rochelle surrendered, leaving Richelieu free to concentrate on intervention in Italy; at about the same time came news of Piet Heyn's capture of the treasure-fleet in September. Faced with a sudden lack of immediate resources, Olivares wished to accept the 1 See below, Chapter vn, p. 228. R. Rodenas Vilar, La Politico Europea de Espana durante la Guerra de Treinta Anos (1624-30) (Madrid, 1967), p. 146. 2 42 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION Dutch terms for a truce and concentrate on defeating France. A majority of the Council of State supported him, but again Philip refused then- advice and decided to try to meet the crisis by bluff. 1 The result was disaster in 1629. The French defeated Savoy, relieved Casale and established themselves in Italy, while Frederick Henry, en- couraged by French subsidies, besieged Bois-le-Duc and eventually took it in September. Now it was Spain which had to appeal to the emperor for assistance. The sending of an imperial army to Italy not only weakened Ferdinand's position in Germany and so made still more remote any hope of a German alliance to defeat the Dutch, but it also gave the emperor the possibility of settling the Mantuan question unilaterally with the French, without consulting Madrid. This the French envoys at Ratisbon succeeded in doing in 1630 by playing on the emperor's hopes that they would not incite opposition to the election of his son as king of the Romans. The French over-reached themselves in denouncing the agreement made at Ratisbon, but the final settlement at the Treaty of Cherasco (1631) by giving France direct control of access to Italy by the acquisition of Pinerolo and Casale was more dangerous to Spain than the peaceful succession of Nevers to the Mantuan inheritance would have been. This result cost Spain by Olivares' reckoning over 10,000,000 ducats. It had also severely strained French government and finances and forced Louis XIII to choose between pursuing far-reaching reforms and costly anti-Habsburg foreign policy, but Richelieu could still buy time free from direct involvement in war. 2 Spain resumed the quest for a truce with the United Provinces, only to find that they were now mainly interested in the negotiations as a means of encouraging rebellion in the south. Spain had lost opportunities for limiting her commitments and had ensured that they would increase. By 1632 financing the war by means involving a large measure of consultation with traditional assem- blies and of respect for fueros had reached its limits. Henceforward greater resort to force and extraordinary measures were essential and the change is to some extent symbolized by the setting up of the Junta de Ejecucion in 1634 which replaced the traditional Council of State as the centre of decision-making. By 1636 these methods had apparently over- come disaster in Germany and near-disaster in the Netherlands, were raising large forces intended to expel the Dutch from northern Brazil, and had forced Richelieu to declare open war on Spain and face defeat and invasion in northern France. Although Richelieu and Olivares were engaged almost continuously in secret peace negotiations from 1636, these reversals of the disasters from 1628 to 1633 must have strengthened Olivares' conviction that his will power, energy and gambler's nerve could prevail over the deficiencies produced by exhaustion and dissension in Spain's dominions for long enough to impose her terms abroad. 1 Ibid. pp. 166-70,180-1. • See below, Chapter xvi, pp. 488-9. 43 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008 3-aDECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR Thus the declaration of war between France and Spain in 1635 did prove a real turning point in international relations. Eventually Spain had to accept the long-mooted peace with the United Provinces and yet was unable to keep the emperor in the war against France. Even before 1648 this phase of the war had decisively affected the governments and economies of the belligerents. As Spain was the country ultimately worst affected it is worth attempting a rough analysis of its fiscal regime, and its peculiarities. 1 By comparison with France one obvious contrast is that the weight of indirect taxation was very much heavier in Castile. However it should be remembered that since the sixteenth century there had been a general tendency for states to increase the relative contribution of indirect taxes and that if Spain was the most extreme example of this, the other country where they were probably as important was the United Provinces. Thanks to its long regalist tradition the Spanish crown certainly got greater contributions from its clergy than the French, though it is impos- sible to assess the relative proportions of clerical wealth taken by the two crowns. Another and greater contrast with France is the profit made from manipulating the coinage; there was no debasement in France, though the money of account was devalued and changes in mint ratios and the nominal values of coins were made. France's monetary system was not as stable as that of the United Provinces or England, but it was less violently disturbed than those of Castile or Germany or Poland, while the manipulations of Castile's coinage continued for much longer than in any other country, with the possible exception of the Ottoman Empire. In both Spain and France customs duties on overseas trade were a far less important part of revenue than in the United Provinces or England, or Denmark. In both Spain and France contracts with and ad- vances from financiers were important. Both states ruined their credit; in the short run the French financiers seemed to have had the better bargain and by the 1650s seemed to be in full control of financial admini- stration, while Spain's were more frequently the victims of the crown's necessities and of their unpopularity. Both countries' wars were financed by repudiations of assignments of revenue, sales of annuities, offices and privileges, forced loans, requisitions and billeting of troops. While Spain's finances had been even more desperate for even longer than those of France, it may be that her financial administration was better informed about the true current state of her affairs than the French one. Spain's troubles were certainly not due to her government's ignorance of what was happening. The importance of the manipulation of Castile's coinage is shown by the fact that it provided 48,000,000 ducats for the crown 1621-58, against 34,000,000 from American silver. After 1640 America provided only 11,000,000 ducats and coinage 30,000,000. In the first twenty years of his 1 Based on A. Dominguez Ortiz, Politico y Hacienda de Felipe IV (Madrid, i960). 44 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION reign Philip IV's receipts averaged about 18,000,000 ducats a year, 1 but some 6,000,000 were assigned to the payment of juros [annuities] which already amounted to 5,600,000 in 1621. Of the remaining receipts, perhaps 10% came from direct taxes, mostly clerical subsidies, supple- mented by occasional donativos. The largest item, some 90,000,000 (averaging 4,500,000 a year) were the servicios voted by the Cortes which mostly consisted of indirect taxes on foodstuffs [the millones]. There was also from 1631 a royal tax on salt, while the old alcabalas [sales tax], now assigned or alienated, amounted to nearly 3,000,000, so that by the 1630s taxes on consumption were about 10,000,000 ducats a year or more on a population probably somewhat under 6,000,000. The next largest item in the unassigned receipts, some 37,000,000, came from the Cruzada [sale of bulls of indulgence], ordinary clerical subsidies and the revenues of the military orders, followed by the coinage yielding nearly 18,000,000. Then came 16,000,000 from Media anata of juros. In 1634 half the interest due to foreigners owning juros was withheld, in 1635 and 1636 the whole, while natives received a third and a half respectively; in 1637-40 half from both, in 1641 the whole and from 1645 always a half and from 1648 more than a half. Except in the most desperate crises widows, poor nobles, hospitals, nunneries and endowments for festivals of the Blessed Sacra- ment were exempt, those whose interest was withheld had to accept it in the form of juros of the same face value. The crown got a secure and regular revenue of some 2,500,000 ducats, ruined its credit and reduced the market price of juros to half their face value which had usually equalled their market price in the sixteenth century. 2 The crown had to force purchase of juros in 1637,1640, 1646 and 1649, assigning a quota to corporations, office-holders and individuals in each region. The donativo had seemed to offer hope of escape from such expedients. They were in theory benevolences from those best able to pay, but even the successful ones of 1590 and 1624 were used by nobles as opportunities for obtaining royal privileges to extend or convert censos on their lands at lower rates of interest. That of 1629 was in large part a sale of privileges and pardons to towns and individuals. The towns were allowed to sell common lands, or break up pastures and above all to raise additional excises or dues especially on their rural pecheros. In 1632 the attempt to make the donativo more an appeal to individual patriotism led to resis- tance and failure; it raised only 1,000,000 ducats against some 4,000,000 each from those of 1624 and 1629. In 1635 the crown tried to avoid bargains with the towns, but individuals still obtained pardons and privileges, in particular the nobles were exempted from personal military 1 These are receipts accounted for in Dominguez Ortiz, Politico y Hacienda, appendix 1, but average receipts for the whole reign were probably about 20,000,000 ducats a year, ibid. p . 182. • A. Castillo Pintado, 'Los Juros de Castilla . . . " Hispania, Vol. xxni (1963), p . 63. 45 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR service. This again raised about 4,000,000, but was in fact the last donativo to raise a large sum. In 1637 preparations for a 25% tax on censos were made, but came to nothing in face of particularly strong opposition from the clergy and the Basque provinces. In 1640 a plan for a graded capitation tax also failed. The only regular direct tax paid by the titled nobility was the lanzas instituted in 1631, by which they and the bishops agreed indivi- dually to pay for contingents of troops. Its yield was supposed to be 400,000 ducats, but by 1660 was only 150,000. Presumably the yield was better maintained under Olivares and in fact the magnates were forced to contribute very heavily to the war in his last years. From 1635 to 1640 some 3,600,000 ducats was raised for the army. By 1643 the duke of Medi- naceli had contributed half a million ducats. Such exactions were the main cause of the magnates' growing hostility to the court and to Olivares whose fall inaugurated a regime of comparative immunity for the greater nobles. Traditionally the Cortes of Castile, like the French States General, had always opposed sale of offices and the crown had repeatedly broken promises to end the practice. But by the 1630s the Cortes hoped to reduce the burdensomeness of the servicios by agreeing to the creation and sale of new municipal offices and the sale of fiscal and legal offices. It is impos- sible to estimate the yield from sale of offices; it must have been con- siderable, though probably not as important as in France in the 1630s. There sales of new offices, of increased wages of old ones, droit annuel and so on averaged over a third of the cash receipts of the central treasury. But the yield of the highest year, some 36,000,000 livres, was only just over half the assessment of the taille and its military supplements in 1639 at 69,000,000. By 1640 creation of new offices and additional wages had satiated demand and was lowering their price; 1 sale of new offices as a major expedient was exhausted. The crown continued to force its officers to buy increases in wages which it was then unable to pay, just as Philip IV had to force his officers and subjects to buy juros. But the great contrast was in the role of indirect taxes whose gross yield was about 38% of the taille and its supplements as assessed in 1639, though the proportion rose in the 1640s. The total taxation of the clergy averaged under 2,000,000 a year 1615-66, but nearly half of this consisted of tenths which had already been alienated to pay rentes. The dons gratuits voted by the clergy averaged under half a million livres 1626-36 and from 1636 to 1645 900,000, while in 1645-56 they declined to rather less than the first figure. 2 Spain certainly got more from its clergy, especially in the 1630s, though it is impossible to say precisely how much. The fact that French clergy's taxation averaged over 3,500,000 livres a year from 1666 to 1715 and that the dons gratuits alone averaged nearly 5,000,000 1690-1715 suggests that they had escaped lightly in the earlier period. 1 8 See below, Chapter xvi, pp. 495-6. P. Blet, Le Clerge de France et la Monarchie (Rome, 1959), Vol. n, pp. 391-4. 46 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION By comparison with 1626, the assessment of the taille had doubled by 1636 and, including the military supplements, more than trebled by 1639. Its incidence is best illustrated by local examples, though there were con- siderable regional variations. In the gtneralite of Caen the taille was 1,075,000 livres in 1631, just under 2,300,000 in 1635, 3,200,000 in 1638 and about the same in 1643, with additional military charges of 700,000, an almost fourfold increase 1631-8. But by 1639 40% of the assessment was in arrears, as against 19-6% in 1629. As with the office-holders, the willingness and capacity of the taillables to pay increasing levies was being exhausted. In Montpellier (in a pays d'etat) the taille was about 30,000 livres in 1600, had doubled by 1627 and was 100,000 in 1640. The assessment of the small town of Espalion in Rouergue increased from 1,266 livres in 1618 to over 6,800 in 1643. In the giniralite of Bordeaux the taille increased from a little over 1,000,000 between 1610 and 1632 to 2,000,000 in 1635, 3,000,000 in 1644 and almost 4,000,000 in 1648— including military charges it was about 5,000,000. But this did not account for all the charges; financial officials were entitled to fees, parishes had to pay dues for garrisons, militia, billeting, so that their total expenses could be twice the amount of the taille. Many towns, including important ones such as Bordeaux, were exempt from the taille, but they were still liable to provide subsistence for troops, raise forced loans and contributions for the crown, which were levied by additional octrois or other indirect taxes. Others were not directly assessed and could evade part of their quota by overcharging neighbouring villages. All towns ran into debt and their inability to meet further demands led to increasing intervention in their affairs by intendants or governors, tax-farmers and royal officials. In 1647 the government doubled municipal octrois, but disposed of half or more of them itself. By 1660 Amiens had a debt of 315,975 livres, four or five times its average annual receipts in the 1650s. Admittedly Amiens was in a frontier province, but everywhere the accumulation of municipal and communal debts was one of the most important consequences of the war and was responsible for the extension of the monarchy's administrative tutelage. For as arrears and debts piled up, the legal expenses of village communities grew as they had to pay the expenses of imprisoned collectors of the taille, or of seizures and other legal processes. Growing municipal and communal indebtedness were everywhere the result of states' increasing fiscal demands and difficulties, though the social and administrative consequences were not necessarily the same as in France. The most spectacular example is perhaps that of Naples, which of all the Spanish dominions was most open to fiscal pressure from Madrid and contributed most to its war effort, especially after 1636. 1 By then the debt had risen from about 30,000,000 ducats in 1626 (when the deficit was already 6,800,000) to 40,000,000, but had doubled by 1648 1 R. Villari, La Rivolta Antispagnola a Napoli. Le Origini 1585-1647 (Ban, 1967). 47 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR to 80,000,000. Communal debts, mainly the result of the crown's exac- tions, were 54,000,000 in 1637. The kingdom was sending abroad some 3,500,000 a year towards the war. Part of this was raised by new taxes on export of oil and silk and on consumption of oil, flour, salt and grain at Naples, which were immediately alienated to financiers. But much was raised by in effect devaluing the obligations for which old direct and indirect taxes had already been alienated and by selling titles, offices, rights and jurisdiction over communes and lands of the royal demesne. The chief beneficiary after 1636 was Bartolomeo Aquino, who with his partners eventually established a near-monopoly of revenues and advances. He had been a merchant and during his supremacy as a financier many who continued as merchants went bankrupt. His first victims were foreign- ers who held assignments of revenues from solvent communes and were forced to exchange them for assignments on insolvent ones. The raising of new direct and indirect taxes in a period of depression meant that the yield of older taxes fell. Already by 1637 old investors had lost 50% of their capital, but the crown's credit was only beginning its decline; by 1646-7 Aquino was paying only 10-15% of their nominal value for the new obligations on its revenues. In the meantime he and others had also bought up old assignments and pensions at give-away prices. Fiscal officials, holders of assigned taxes, and the creditors of communes all had the right to send commissari to collect their money as best they could. Increasingly this was done by means of sequestrations which had to be carried out by force, just as the tax farmers and intendants in France had to raise special troops to enforce payment of taxes. But in some of his contracts Aquino was acting as agent on a 10% com- mission for nobles buying assignments of customs and direct taxes. He was also a means to sales of titles and offices and above all of portions of royal demesne declared inalienable in 1620. Aquino's monopoly was destroyed by the revolution of 1648, but he had assisted the last phase of social changes, which proved more enduring. The most obvious symbol of these changes was the increase in the number of titled nobility: 133 in 1601,161 in 1613, 271 in 1631, 341 in 1640,434 in 1675, while the number of untitled barons remained roughly constant at a little under 500. The period of greatest growth was 1620 to 1650 and the greatest increase was in the highest titles of prince and duke. Aquino himself became prince of Caramanico and a number of Genoese and Tuscans acquired lands and titles in Naples. Even in 1600 few of the holders of titles had held them for as long as a century. The most conspicuous new recruits in the later period were financiers, merchants and lesser nobles who had made their fortunes as office-holders and councillors. But many old-established baronial families also pros- pered and were promoted; in 1600 many of the magnates were heavily in debt and a good deal of land was sold on this account, but after about 48 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION 1620 they seem generally to have been more successful in exploiting their estates. Communes made optimistic leases of seigneurial rights at rents which fell into arrears, as prices stagnated, or fell, and fiscal pressures increased. Once in debt to a baron, they might be forced to surrender administrative independence and valuable tolls or lands. Such bargains could also be enforced by hiring bandits to threaten and murder. Both new and old nobles were the chief gainers from the crown's increasing financial difficulties, while merchants, townspeople, peasants and lesser office-holders were the losers. . Politically the nobles prevented the crown from lightening the weight of taxation by successfully opposing the introduction of a tax on rent charges and of stamp duties, which would have injured their interests. They added to the viceroy's difficulties by denouncing the financiers in Parliament, by encouraging smuggling and resistance to commissari and royal officials in communes under their protection, while at the same time buying up direct taxes and rights over royal demesne. In the pro- vinces, despite their protests and appeals to the crown, more and more communities were at the mercy of barons and cut off from effective help by royal courts and officials. To get supply from Parliament in 1639 the viceroy withdrew the edict of 1637 which subjected baronial jurisdiction over offences involving firearms to royal control and so threatened to control their strong-arm men. Increasing baronial exploitation of provin- cial townspeople and peasants meant heavier taxes on the merchants, artisans and labourers of Naples. The attempts to bring to justice a few extremist nobles who were involved in plots with France, and the sum- moning of representatives from all the communes in 1647 to discuss the financial disorders which predictably led to a flood of complaints against the barons might suggest that the crown wished to revive Osuna's policy of seeking popular allies against the nobility. But if the crown had ever been free to do so, this was no longer possible, its power was irrevocably mortgaged to the nobility. In 1647 towns and peasants rose against domination and exploitation by the baronage. These had been intensified by the crown's fiscal neces- sities, 1 which were the immediate occasion of the rising in Naples itself provoked by a new tax on fruit. There Masaniello led the people not only against the urban nobles, the financiers and tax collectors, but also against the bandits belonging to the barons' retinues, and sought support from the country. Neither in Naples nor the provinces did the rebels begin by attacking Spanish rule. Indeed they appealed to a more or less mythical paternalistic king for justice and redress. The leaders of communes wanted to become the immediate subjects of the crown as a guarantee of 1 R. Villari, Mezzogiomo e contadini nelVeta moderna (Bari, 1961), pp. 118-42; G. Pepe, n Mezzogiomo d'Italia sotto gli Spagnoli. La Tradizione Storiografico (Florence, 1952), pp. 137-41. 213-20. 49 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR local particularism. This appeal to legitimate authority against injustice and usurpation gave the movement real power in the provinces by uniting peasants and urban oligarchies, so that the barons were helpless and could only flee or make concessions. Their only hope was in rallying to the viceroy and awaiting the arrival of Spanish troops. This helped to ensure that Naples would throw off Spanish allegiance and proclaim a republic. Mazarin was unwilling to assist a republic, while few nobles were willing to seek French intervention which would complete the victory of their enemies. Mazarin's reluctance, and his determination to thwart the ambitions of the duke of Guise, ensured the eventual submission of Naples. Yet the very importance of the peasants in the revolt had made its success doubtful. Apart from disliking destruction of property and violence, the better-off townspeople were economically and socially the rivals of the barons in exploiting peasants and artisans. Already by 1600 the ruling groups in the communes of Calabria had been shifting the basis of taxation required to meet both donativi and communal debts from hearth taxes to indirect and capitation taxes from which those 'living nobly' in occupations not involving manual labour were exempt. 1 The clergy claimed similar exemption, though some of them often sympathized with popular grievances and sometimes joined the revolts. They could not afford a renewal of peasant refusals to pay tithe which had been frequent in the grain-producing areas in the late sixteenth cen- tury. The clergy and urban leaders also wished to save their investments in public and communal debts and offices. They needed a reformed regime, the restoration of 'popular liberties' and an equal share with the nobility in government which Genoino had been advocating since 1620,* not a transformation of society. When Naples submitted in 1648, the barons were free to reconquer their fiefs and repudiate any concessions made in 1647. Some reforms of financial administration did take place in the next twenty years, but the gains made by the baronage were not seriously affected. A comparison with Sicily underlines the importance of fiscal exploita- tion and its results in Naples. It is generally agreed that Sicily suffered much less from Spanish exactions than Naples. Although the parlia- ment of Sicily never fought any major battles, Madrid recognized it as a forum for hearing grievances and granting favours which still had some potential for real resistance. The parliament of Naples did not meet again after 1642, but the continued existence of that of Sicily safeguarded the island's privileges. The viceroys, like the parliament, were anxious it should be spared and regularly pleaded the country's poverty and exhaus- tion. Much the same pleas came from Naples, but they were less heeded 1 F. Caracciolo, 'Fisco e contribuenti in Calabria . . . ' Nuovo Rivista Storica, Vol. XLW (1963), pp. 504-38- 2 M. Schipa, Masaniello (Bari, 1925). 50 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION in Madrid, which was used to asking for what its subjects believed to be impossible. Moreover, in the case of Catalonia over-estimation of its resources through sheer ignorance was part of Olivares' miscalculations. Perhaps the Sicilian barons' tradition of loyalty to Spain made Madrid less exigent than towards the Neapolitans whose propensities towards other allegiances had been greater. For Sicilian men of property rent charges were of great importance: everyone invested in the state's financial difficulties by buying assignments of revenues and privileges. The crown sold its demesne and offices, while creating titles at much the same rate as in Naples. The towns were ruled by nobles who at Messina were exceptional in still having active mercantile interests. They all sought privileges for themselves and their towns and were likely to invest in offices. They also invested in rent charges and mort- gages on baronial estates, as did the church. The barons always claimed to be chronically in debt, but were able to raise money to buy titles, privileges and rights to taxes. The most important privilege was that granted in 1610 of buying merum et mixtum imperium [full criminal and civil jurisdiction] over their fiefs. The crown also protected them from their creditors and upset investors by forcing reductions of interest and withholding interest payments on its obligations. The parliament was prepared to grant special donativi to guarantee the interest payments. The crown recognized the importance of investments in rent charges when in 1642 it refused the barons' request for a forced reduction of the interest on their debts. 1 The universal complaints of ruin as a result of war and its costs were probably more exaggerated in Sicily than in Naples. For certainly the export trade of Sicily had grown in value. The export of corn though subject to harvest fluctuations remained at the average level reached in the later sixteenth century. 2 Messina's exports of silk rose by over a third between the 1590s and 1620s and maintained this average level, though with greater fluctuations in the 1650s and 1660s. Production may have been growing between 1620 and 1650 and then reached a plateau. The average value of the silk exported was at least a third greater than that of corn. 8 While prosperity of exports does not demonstrate general pros- perity, there was also considerable internal colonization. In the sixteenth century twelve new communes were founded; in the seventeenth seventy- six with a population of 63,000, of which fifty-eight were founded before 1653. There was a general tendency for peasants to migrate from the more 1 V. Titone, La Sicilia delta Dominazione Spagnola alPUnita (Bologna, 1955), pp. 23-4, 289-320; G. Tricoli, ' U n a battaglia parlamentare . . . del secolo XVII', Melanges Marongiu (Brussels, 1968), pp. 213-45. 1 A. F. Braudel, La Mediterrani et le Monde mediterraneen . . . (2nd ed. 1966), Vol. I, pp. 541, 545-8. • M. Aymard, 'Commerce et production de la soie sicilienne au XVI et XVII siecles', Melanges d'Archdologie et d'Histoire, Vol. Lxxvn (1965), pp. 609-40. 51 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR heavily taxed communes of the royal demesne to the baronial ones, and the new communes were especially attractive to new settlers because of initially very light dues and rents. 1 To some limited extent baronial debts must have helped to finance this colonization. In the long run it may have increased exhaustion and erosion of the soil and feudal abuses, but in our period it provided at least some peasants with more attractive choices than existed in Castile or Naples. Possibly these circumstances may help to explain why the popular risings of 1647, occasioned by bad harvests in 1646, were less bloody and prolonged than those in Naples, though their first targets were the same— high indirect taxes and noble privileges. In Palermo the mass uprising was soon controlled by the maestranze [gilds], whose leader d'Alesio produced a programme very similar to Genoino's: an equal share in government for the people (by which was meant the better-off townspeople) with the nobility and a more equal distribution of taxes. Concessions and pro- crastination by the viceroy to d'Alesio undermined the support of the maestranze. Although there were revolts in many other towns, Messina maintained its traditional hostility to Palermo and the other towns made no attempt to organize any kind of general authority, or to assist each other, as was done to some extent in Naples. The capitulations granted to d'Alesio were disregarded; the attempt to reform the fiscal system by abolishing indirect taxes on food was abandoned, as after a short time was the appointment of popular consuls to the senates of Palermo and Catania. One lasting result of the revolt, apart from reminding everyone from the gilds upwards of the delicate balance of interrelated interests over which the viceroy presided, was a reduction in the exemptions to the indirect taxes which were to be supervised by a new financial deputation of nobles and clergy elected from the holders of obligations. This was meant to ensure the regular payment of interest, though at a lower rate. In Milan, whither most of the money raised in Naples went, Spanish fiscal exactions were probably less than in Naples, but greater than in Sicily. But the direct effects of war were greater, above all in the continual passage and quartering of troops. Once again the government was selling its regalian rights, offices and titles, though there was no great increase in the number of fiscal offices until after 1650. The urban patriciates were relatively more important than in the south. 1 (Of 270 titled nobility and 433 feudatories in 1700, 157 and 207 had been granted since 1646 and 158 and 205 respectively came from Milan's patriciate.) They had ceased to be directly involved in industry or trade, but ensured their monopoly of high 1 C. A. Garufi, 'Patti Agrari e Comuni Feudale di Nuova Fondazione in Sicilia', Pt n Archivio Storico Siciliano, Third Series, Vol. n (1947). 2 Chiefly based on B. Caizzi, 'Le Classi Sociali', Storia di Milano, Vol. xi, Pt v (Fonda- zione Treccani degli Alfieri, 1958) and // Comasco sotto il Dominio Spagnolo (Como, 1955). 52 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION municipal, administrative and judicial offices by requiring long and expensive academic studies and proofs of nobility. From 1593 the college of Jurisconsults in Milan decided to exclude anyone who was active in mercantile trading. Such families invested in public debt, private lending and foreign exchange transactions, as well as in land and feudal rights. Investments in rent charges, mortgages and public debt meant as else- where that men could 'live nobly' and they or their descendants would be accepted as noble. The buying of jurisdictional and regalian rights over communities from the crown in the form of fiefs held on a variety of conditions was comparatively easy and required money, not proofs of nobility. The purchasers included besides patricians, financiers, merchants and traders but, given the decline of trade and industry, financiers pre- dominated among the new men. Infeudation of lands and communities took place on a large scale, despite the efforts of communes to buy immunity. Some feudatories had very large possessions and others very small ones. The nobles owned almost half the total land and the church perhaps a quarter, though the proportions were higher in the plain. As returns from land were low, the older noble families who were not patricians with offices needed more than their legal privileges of partial exemption from taxes. They sought favours and additional sources of income. Magnates piled up arrears of taxes and sought remissions, while lesser nobles tended to suffer and go under. Thus there was a growth of great estates as well as in recruitment to the nobility. Both land and money became concentrated into fewer hands. There had been some growth of small peasant proprietorship in the plains in the sixteenth century, but this was checked and there were sales and temporary abandonment of holdings; south of Como the worst period for sales of peasant property was 1620-50. In the mountainous regions great estates were less dominant and conditions were better for small owners. In Milan and the other cities wealth and power had gone from merchants, traders and entrepreneurs to office- holders and nobles, including new men who were financiers. Declining industry and international trade and a preference for invest- ing cash in rent charges and land were not peculiar to Spanish Italy. Similar phenomena can be found in Genoa, Florence and Venice. Sharply falling production of woollen and silk textiles in the old urban centres from the early seventeenth century was compensated partly by growing produc- tion in villages and other towns, but little of this was exported. By the later seventeenth century Italy, like Spain or Poland, had become mainly an exporter of primary products, such as silk, olive oil, wine, rice or sulphur, in its trade with north-western Europe. Its earnings from shipping and banking had declined, but its industrial self-sufficiency, especially in textiles, was much greater than that of Spain or Poland. It has been argued that the crucial period when the Venetian nobility 53 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR increasingly turned away from commercial activities to investment in land was between about 1570 and 1630. 1 Milanese capitalists from about the 1590s showed a radical change in business interests towards concen- trating investment in financial affairs, accepting risks for the sake of quick returns. Both in Venice and Milan urban trade and industry were increas- ingly heavily burdened with taxes and high labour costs. Monetary dis- order and debasement, which was also the product of financial difficulties, encouraged concentration on foreign exchange transactions. The most fully documented examples of this are the Lucini family partnerships, whose profits were used to acquire 1,100,000 lire of real property and 800,000 in charges on public, communal and private revenues. After 1615 they largely withdrew from the foreign exchanges; this may be taken as a symptom of the general malaise about the economic and political future, anticipating the crisis of money and credit in 1619, which inaugurated prolonged war and economic depression. 2 Thus it can be argued that already the patterns of economic behaviour in northern Italy were changing decisively before the war could have had any effect. Yet these changes and the growing sense of insecurity were certainly influenced by the financial difficulties of Spain and other states before 1618. Its coincidence with the outbreak of general war made the monetary crisis of 1619-23 in Milan so serious. Its effects and the direct impact of the Mantuan war were reinforced by the plague of 1630. Returns from land also fell catastrophically. The accounts of a great estate show a net return of about 3% before 1623, perhaps nearer 4% before 1610. After 1623 it was scarcely 1% and in some years showed a loss. By the 1640s expenditure on repairs and improvements had fallen by nearly a half, fiscal charges amounted to nearly half the gross receipts and there was an average annual deficit of expenses over receipts of 2,330 lire com- pared with an average surplus of 14,700 lire 1600-23.* To survive, nobles had to depend on favours, borrowing, income from offices and obliga- tions. The price of land fell very considerably, so that for those with cash profitable purchases could be made, or usurious contracts. But the great rush to buy land by moneyed men had been in the first three decades of the century. Those who could consolidate their estates and wait saw their incomes revive again after 1659 and still more after 1670, while economic life in the towns still stagnated. The Milanese differed from the south in the apparent absence of wide- 1 C. M. Cipolla, 'The Economic Decline of Italy'; S. J. Woolf, 'Venice and the Terra- ferma' in Crisis and Change in the Venetian Economy, ed. B. Pullan (1968), pp. 127-45, 175-203. 8 A. de Maddalena, 'L'immobilizzazione della ricchezza nella Milano spagnola . . .', Annale delVIstituto di Storia Ec. e Soc. delVUniversita di Napoli, Vol. VI (1965), pp. 39~72; 'Affaires et gens d'affaires LombardessurlesfoiresdeBiseiJzone',/4nntf/es(i967), pp. 939-90. s A. de Maddalena, 'I bilanci dal 1600 al 1647 di una azienda fondiaria lombarda', Rivista Int. di Scienze Economiche e Commerciale, Vol. 11 (1955), pp. 510-25, 671-98. 54 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION spread popular revolts. To attribute this simply to the continuous pre- sence of considerable garrisons and the fact that it was a more active theatre of war, when it was the presence of troops and the nearness of war which produced revolt in Catalonia, may seem superficial, but at least emphasizes the different traditions of government in the two dominions. Spanish power was weak in 1647-8, so the examples of Naples and Sicily suggest that in most of Europe rebellions which failed to gain noble support and probably some external assistance were doomed. England comes nearest to being the exception, but there the Scots gave crucial aid and even the Commonwealth had some leaders and support from impor- tant families of landed gentry. The revolt of the Ukraine is perhaps the nearest thing to a successful peasant rising, but most of its leaders had ambitions very different from the mass of their followers and it ultimately depended on foreign aid. In Portugal the widespread peasant rising against taxes of 1637 failed, where a popular revolt with noble support in 1640 was successful and received French aid. Catalonia had both French aid and a popular uprising which both compelled and rallied noble support. Equally noble conspiracies did not guarantee success of themselves, even when there were considerable popular and noble grievances to exploit, as those of Medina-Sidonia and Ayamonte in Andalusia in 1641, van der Bergh in the southern Netherlands or the marquess of Acaya in Naples. Pseudo-Marxist explanations that the Bohemian revolt mainly failed because the nobles refused to seek peasant support seem unrealistic, but do point to an obvious but important limitation. The Old English in Ireland were uneasy in joining a rebellion against Protestant landlords, even though their titles were based on confiscation. Plots by magnates in France in the twenty years after 1629 failed to achieve much popular support, during a period of widespread popular revolts. Condd and the princely Frondeurs did get some popular support most notably in Bordeaux and to some extent in Paris. Popular revolts were usually anti- fiscal in origin, but war often increased dependence or identification of interests in relationships between crowns and great nobles. They could afford to buy for cash, or as rewards for loyalty and service, the crown's regalian rights, and became defenders of a prerogative they held in pawn. As communes or peasants fell into debt, or government obligations fell in value, there were bargains to be snatched by those who had cash, or power to borrow it. But, as we have seen, fiscal pressures meant that peasants were less able to pay rents and seigneurial dues; quartering of troops was particularly ruinous to both peasants and landlords. Thus a noble's credit both in the literal sense of being able to go on owing large sums to the state or individuals and in the sense of prestige was more necessary than ever to maintain his status, and essential if he wanted to increase his power and wealth. If in peacetime no king's 55 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR revenues were enough to satisfy all his magnates and their followers, the pressures of war finance made royal favours more valuable and the magnates' support more necessary. Too much pressure could impair even the loyalty of Castilian grandees, as Olivares demonstrated. The nobles of Portugal and Catalonia were nearer to the court than those of Italy, yet seemed as cut off from its opportunities. Catalonia had little in the way of royal demesne and regalian rights which could be auctioned off as in Italy. By the 1640s most European nobilities had undergone an inflation of titles, new men had bought their way in and more land and wealth had been concentrated in great estates. Some broad resemblances can be seen in Castile, Naples, Sicily, Bohemia, Austria, France and Sweden, in so far as magnates were actively or passively allied with governments, financiers, jurist councillors and military entrepreneurs in exploiting war. The main victims at home or abroad were rural popula- tions, but to varying degrees towns, office-holders and lesser nobles were under increasing pressure. War and war finance tended to destroy the plausibility of royal govern- ments as dispensers of protection and justice to their subjects. A general slogan of popular revolts was 'Long Live the king without the taxes'. The sheer lack of protection was at its worst in Germany, where peasants' attempts to defend and revenge themselves against troops led to savage reprisals. Towns and communes might pay large sums to remain the direct vassals of the crown, yet great nobles in Castile and Italy could often protect their estates and vassals from the worst excesses of royal troops and tax-farmers; flight from villages under royal jurisdiction to those under private ones was not peculiar to Sicily. In France there was a con- stant struggle by rural nobles, royal officers and town oligarchs to reduce the burden of the taille on their own tenants and peasants at the expense of others. Thus the intendants seemed to play an ambiguous part, they were simultaneously the instruments of the tax-farmers imposing collec- tion, contrainte solidaire, distraints by armed force and also of attempts to ensure more equitable assessments. Both processes involved over-riding the interests of local officers and nobles. Peasants and the poor could be incited to rebel in the name of provincial liberties against new taxes, or new royal officials by both urban oligarchies (including royal officers) and nobles. This was the complement to services of protection against distraints and billeting which seigneurs might provide at other times and which might also unite taillables and privileged even against the intendants' attempts at equitable assessment. Peasant revolts in France were usually directed against tax-farmers and fiscal officials. Unlike the rebels of 1647 in Naples, they seldom attacked nobles or seigneurial dues. In the more peaceful conditions of 1614, villages in Champagne had complained about hunting rights, abuses of seigneurial justice, arbitrary raising of dues, and the abuses produced by clientage in 56 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION assessing the faille?- Perhaps pressure of war finance made such grievances less dominant, but the areas which later saw peasant risings do not include Champagne, which was a heavily garrisoned frontier province. In the later sixteenth century provinces as far apart as Languedoc and Picardy had seen effective resistance to paying tithes which apparently ceased under Louis XIII. Tithes were not the first target of most peasant dis- turbances, though they are put first in what seems the least negative and most spontaneous programme, that of 'the peasant commune' of Poitou in 1636.* The peasants took most of the risks and were the chief victims of repression, frequently conducted by provincial governors, or clients of magnates, assisted by officers of the high robe from Paris. The intendants were not usually regarded by provincial governors as rivals to their authority; magnates, like Conde and Longueville, co-operated with and protected them from the resentments of provincial nobles and officers. Again what Parisian merchants, the Parlements, officers and the lesser nobility had in common was resentment of taxation and financial mis- management. All had selfish reasons for their violent attacks on the way the royal finances had inflicted misery on the masses, but that does not make the misery less real. They were unable to maintain any unity or pursue common objectives together. Yet they had one dominating common hatred, the financiers and tax-farmers, and all wanted a Chambre de Justice to punish and mulct them. The lesser nobles' demands show their jealousy of the magnates, as well as of the high robe. The nobles of Champagne sought reductions of court expenses and pensions and that all governors of provinces and towns should be resident, holding office for three years only: followed by a year without office in which complaints could be heard. 3 The noble assemblies of 1651-2 were particularly con- cerned about ensuring protection from exactions and quartering of troops and suggested raising companies of nobles to protect their provinces. Mazarin's triumph meant the restoration of the financiers and most of the magnates, even Cond6 was restored to his governorships in 1659. The Chambre de Justice had to wait for the personal rule of Louis XIV. The triumph of the financiers after the Fronde contrasts with their fate in Spain in the 1650s even though Fouquet was later to be made a scape- goat for their unpopularity. Although some French financiers were foreigners, the greatest being Barthelemy d'Herwarth, in Spain native Castilians were of very minor importance. Down to the suspension of payments in 1627 Genoese bankers dominated the crown's affairs. There- 1 Y. Durand (ed.), Cahiers du Doliances des Paroisses du Bdilliage de Troves (1966), pp. 58-9,65-7. s R. Mousnier (ed.), Lettres . . . au Chancelier Seguier, Vol. n (1964), pp. 1105-6; cf. p. 1164. * R. Mousnier, J. Labaut, Y. Durand (eds.), Deux Cahiers de la Noblesse (1649-51) (1963), pp. 142, 152-3, 82-3. 57 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR after some of them continued with more restricted operations, but they were largely replaced by Portuguese financiers. This development owed something to Olivares' desire to keep Spain's trade out of foreign hands, but more to the zeal of the Portuguese inquisition under Philip II's rule. Many of Castile's Jews had gone to Portugal and remained there. By 1600 the traditions of Jewish culture and religion were virtually dead in Spain, while in Portugal common usage made Jew and businessman synonymous. By 1620 the Inquisition's success in detecting alleged Judai- zers and encouraging search for purity of blood had led them to complain that a third of the population was Jewish. The pressure was such that the descendants of families which had been driven out of Castile began to return to it as a refuge and resume their medieval role in royal finance. Philip III sold pardons and privileges to the conversos and in 1628-9 they bought freedom to trade, marry and settle in Spain, the basis for their preponderance in the crown's asientos. In 1640 there were 2,000 Portu- guese merchants in Seville and some 4,000 at Madrid. Olivares protected them from the Inquisition and even considered relaxing the laws about purity; their favour and prosperity was a major reason for his unpopu- larity. Even in the 1630s the Inquisition had tried and ruined at least two prominent financiers; with the revolt of Portugal and Olivares' fall, the Portuguese became more unpopular than ever and the Inquisition had greater freedom. By the 1650s wholesale arrests and condemnations of Portuguese were taking place. Many of the wealthy fled abroad, but a few could still buy real immunity. The Cortizos family kept their fortunes, bought titles, places in the Order of Calatrava and even offices in the Inquisition. Some lesser men continued as farmers of revenues, despite persecutions and confiscations. The crown gained from the confiscations, but finally ruined its credit and any hope of keeping the bulk of overseas trade out of foreign hands. However, the continual arrests and public humiliations at autos of monopolists, financiers and tax-farmers by identifying and punishing the authors of fiscal grievances may have given both commoners and nobles satisfactions which elsewhere could only be attempted by rebellions. In this idiosyncratic and distasteful way Castilian government and society remained united in a hypocritical parody of its former strength, while in the mid-seventeenth, as in the fifteenth century, French absolutism was the product of disunion and deadlock between rival groups, of public weakness, rather than of its own strength. A special case of entry to the greater landed nobility by financiers is that of military entrepreneurs which was particularly important in Bohemia, 1 and to a lesser extent in Austria and Germany. Such entre- preneurs advanced credit to princes (sometimes borrowing from bankers and merchants as Hans de Witte did for Wallenstein) to raise and equip troops. As war continued they accumulated larger credits in the form of 1 See below, Chapter xvn. 58 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION arrears. There were some 1,500 military entrepreneurs in the empire during the Thirty Years War, most of them were originally noble and some had also been wealthy. The physical risks might be greater than in ordinary lending, but if a colonel or commander lived, he could hope to acquire titles and land. The Bavarian Count von Sporck (1601-79) was the son of a peasant, but left 3,000,000 thalers. By the late 1630s there was a high proportion of commoners owning regiments in the imperial army. Over the whole period they were outnumbered by those born noble, who were often originally poor, but might acquire titles and landed estates. 1 In Bohemia and Austria the war caused a concentration of land into greater estates at the expense of the lesser nobility. In Bohemia this pro- cess was more the result of forfeitures and the endowment of great military entrepreneurs, than in Austria where the old knightly class declined and a newly created nobility of civil and military office-holders increased. In Brandenburg the elector recovered control of his demesnes which had been mortgaged to the Estates and extended them, while the lesser nobility survived to a much greater extent to become a nobility of service as army officers. In Sweden the war created a much more numerous nobility, often of foreign origin, endowed with revenues alienated by the crown; but also much concerned with office-holding. The lesser nobles resented the patronage secured by the council families and their allies among the new men, who had found fortunes and titles in the German war. These poorer nobles were willing to support absolutism for the sake of secure wages as military or civil officers. In Denmark, where the crown had about half the land, there had been concentration of estates in the hands of the high nobility whose indebtedness also grew. After 1643 war and the disruption of foreign trade weakened them further and the price of land fell. There absolutism after 1660 removed the legal restrictions on commoners buying noble land, created many new nobles and changed the old nobility into something much more like a nobility of service. In England there were honours and titles to sell but little or nothing to go with them in the way of privileges or jurisdiction. The kings nominated judges and sometimes sold their places, but they did not sell jurisdiction. What profits were to be made from sale of office in the central government went mostly to other office-holders. Sales of crown land were an impor- tant part of extraordinary finance down to the 1650s, but the crown lands were an insignificant part of the country's land, compared with Denmark. There were no permanent direct or indirect taxes to be alienated. Its unpaid justices of the peace constituted a kind of nobility of service which was not necessarily less responsive to royal commands than corporations or holders of venal offices. As a result of the civil war new men and families temporarily dominated local government. But the traditional order which was restored, though more oligarchic, was not a closed 1 F. Redlich, The German Military Enterpriser (Wiesbaden, 1964), Vol. I. 59 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR oligarchy based either on claims to absolutist tutelage over local com- munities or on the alienation of royal authority to holders of hereditary fiefs. One of the major themes of the period is certainly the transformation and consolidation of noble power. But we lack detailed analyses of the origins of even the greater nobility in most countries and means of com- paring rates of change with other periods, let alone estimates of their relative wealth and power. However, it is clear that almost everywhere there was a great increase in the number of higher titles and that both old and new families could profit from the financial difficulties of princes. In many countries there was a growth of great estates partly at the expense of the lesser nobles. The lesser nobles' best chance of survival seems to have been by becoming a service nobility, as in Brandenburg and Sweden; to some extent this must also have happened in France with maintenance of a large standing army after 1659. In Italy and Spain there seems to have been a sharing of state and economic power with the greater nobles, who in a sense take over, or at least become the main beneficiaries of absolutist monarchies, whereas in Poland though magnates were still the main beneficiaries, the constitutional forms were a negation of absolutism. Castile perhaps provides the other example of a state where a very numerous nobility accepted magnate predominance with even less open social disturbance. While the dominance of letrados in sixteenth-century administration may sometimes be exaggerated, the growing importance of councillors of 'cape and sword' after 1600 is undeniable. Perhaps this led to an identification of interests between robe and sword such as took place in eighteenth-century France. Another possibly important mechan- ism was the way limpieza and the Inquisition operated. The purity laws had certainly been used to embarrass the higher nobility and the town oligarchies in the sixteenth century. Under Philip III the nobles com- plained at length of the consequences of esteeming 'a common person who is limpio more than a hidalgo who is n o t . . . ' . In 1624 crown decreed restrictions of proofs and above all of disproofs of limpieza and ordered the destruction of all writings purporting to show impure descent of families (almost always important noble ones). The concentration of the Inquisition's attention on the Portuguese provided a convenient and popular diversion. By the 1650s it was said that nobles of mixed blood felt safe enough to speak disdainfully of the Inquisition. A French observer expressed astonishment at the urban character of the nobles and their lack of hunting rights and the fact that artisans and tradesmen dressed like nobles and wore swords. He exaggerated, but his comments point to a victory for noble aspirations which unified Castilian society, when other victories eluded it. These trends among nobilities may be seen as one of the results of the many attempts to reform states in this period. The demands of rebels for 60 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION the restoration of ancient privileges and levels of taxation had as little success as the plans of lawyers for restoring constitutions, or of statesmen and pamphleteers for reforming taxation, balancing budgets and increas- ing national wealth. The conscious plans were swamped by the needs of war which themselves produced expedients, with important and lasting effects, such as the intendants in France, the introduction of the excise and land tax in England. Even in Spanish Italy a certain amount of redress of some of the worst fiscal abuses happened after 1660. Yet it can be argued that the most successful of all the attempts to carry out general plans for reforming states in a period full of such plans was the reform of the Ottoman state. By the mid-seventeenth century the Ottomans had produced a number of treatises, as concerned with the diagnostics of decline and its remedies as those of the much more prolific Spanish arbitristas} The Ottoman reformers tended to be pessimistic and had all had direct experience of government, unlike some of the arbitristas. Like the French they wanted to abolish sale of office as the root of all evil, like the Scots and English Puritans they wanted to restore the direct rigour of the Sacred Law. They saw (less reluctantly than the leaders of the New Model Army) that this could only be done by a man of the sword. What can easily be overlooked is that in the short run they were much more successful than their western counterparts. Murad IV and the Koprulii Vezirs really did produce effec- tive reforms, as the revival of efficiently kept tax registers and records shows. They were far more ruthless in dealing with tax-farmers and usurpations of revenues, lands and rights than western governments. Their immediate success was perhaps partly due to the fact that what they were trying to restore was not a mythical past of Anglo-Saxon, or Frankish liberties, of primitively pure Christianity, or a Christian imperium, but a government which really had existed and flourished a couple of generations ago and whose records and achievements were carefully studied. This was also their undoing. They found themselves restoring a system of government and above all a military machine which was inappropriate to its tasks. In temporarily restoring something like the old order, they also restored its contradictions which had already produced the near collapse of the early seventeenth century. The Ottoman government was remarkably successful in mobilizing resources; this remained true even after the great defeats of the late seventeenth century. It was its increasing inability to make effective use of those resources above all in war which mattered. As always it could borrow the latest weapons, or experts in engineering and artillery from western Europe. What it could not borrow effectively were the tactics, drill and organization of European field armies which could provide a defensive pattern which was virtually unbeatable 1 B. Lewis, 'Ottoman observers of Ottoman decline', Islamic Studies (Karachi), Vol. I (1962), pp. 71-87. 61 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR by Ottoman formations, as Montecuccoli first demonstrated at St Gotthard (1664). Some Ottoman reformers saw the crucial importance of European sea- power, but plans for promoting overseas trade and native industry do not seem to have occupied them seriously. Traditional Ottoman policies might almost be called the opposite of mercantilism in that it favoured foreign merchants and taxed exports highly. However, in European states fiscal necessity usually over-rode all other considerations in executing policies, and realization of the desirability of promoting native industry, trade and shipping was no guarantee that such results would happen, as the examples of Spain and Poland show. Once the supreme example of a state effectively organized for large-scale war, the Ottoman Empire was in danger of becoming unable to deal with the new techniques and organization of war which were emerging. Clearly war had important effects on European societies, though even here it can be argued that it merely accelerated trends already apparent before 1618. This has been argued even more strongly concerning the economic effects of war, where Germany provides a particularly important problem. As we have seen, the worsening of the condition of peasants and the growth of large noble estates were certainly not peculiar to Germany, but equally Germany was not the only country affected by the pressures of war, though they were certainly more direct and terrible there. The Thirty Years War can also be seen as not having seriously affected the obedience of German prices to the general behaviour and trends of European ones. Slicher van Bath has argued that 'When the average price level remains for a very long time below that of an equally long period immediately preceding it, we can speak of a fundamental change.' Measured in silver equivalents the price of rye behaves in this way in Germany, falling by 40% or more, comparing 1650-99 with 1600-49, and so indicating a prolonged agrarian depression in Europe especially in arable farming. 1 Yet making the same comparison the international price of rye at Amsterdam and Danzig fell by 7% and 1% respectively. Domestic prices of grain in the Netherlands fell very little or even rose slightly and the same is true of England. French prices in silver did not fall nearly so far as German ones and nominal prices of wheat at Beau- vais, Toulouse and Paris rose by about 30%. The only prices which seem to follow the German pattern are Italian ones; wheat at Bassano, Pavia and Siena fell by over 25%, as did rye at Milan. Germany and northern Italy probably lost more population than other areas, 1620-40. A Euro- pean model built on German prices may be deceptive. However, this process has been taken a stage further by arguing that German prices and economic trends 'are part of a general European 1 The Agrarian History of Western Europe, pp. 206-10. 62 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION crisis' and are 'completely in harmony with the long-term movement of prices in Western E u r o p e . . . When the depression of the decade 1640-50 began in Germany, it was one that hit the whole European economy and was not exclusively due to the Thirty Years War.' 1 By looking at prices exclusively in silver the two decades after 1600 can be seen as a period of falling grain prices, heralding depression or crisis. Clearly the wholesale debasements preceding the war do indicate economic difficulties. Yet quite apart from these, German grain prices 1600-50 show more violent fluctuations than in the sixteenth century. This is not true of the southern Netherlands and does not seem to be true of some French series. The short- and long-term behaviour of German prices during and after the war seems to have peculiar characteristics which may be due to the excep- tionally strong impact of war. TABLE 1590-9 1614-23 1624-31 1635-44 1646-53 1. Shipping through the Sound {index numbers) Total no. of passages Total of Dutch and Frieslanders Tonnage of Dutch and Frieslanders 100 100 100 90 53 65 62 97 51 132 56 107 136 62 75 Source; P. Jeannin, 'Les comptes du Sund . . .', Revue Historique, Vol. ccxxxi (1964), p-75- If the volume of maritime trade is any indication of production or prosperity, Jeannin's work on the Sound tolls is of the greatest impor- tance. The volume of shipping was commanded by the amount of grain exported and over 80% consisted of Dutch ships. There was a slump in the 1570s and 1580s, then, as Table 1 shows, a boom in the 1590s (fol- lowed by a decline) then new growth until 1623. The slump 1624-31 was caused first by bad harvests 1622-4 and then by the Swedish blockade of the Vistula. Expansion was resumed in 1635 and the peak of the whole series was reached in 1649-50. The lasting fall in volume came after 1653, not after 1623. This was mainly because western Europe became more self-sufficient in grain. However the value of exports from the Baltic may have risen, since industrial materials, such as iron hemp and flax, in- creased. Earlier exports of flax, hemp and potash had increased con- siderably after 1618, remaining at a high level after 1624. Swedish exports of bar iron were growing rapidly from the 1620s. From 1630 to 1650 the amount exported from the Baltic and the volume of Dutch shipping were 1 H. Kamen, 'Economic and social consequences of the Thirty Years War', Past and Present, no. 39 (1968), pp. 44-61. 63 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR all rising, while prices at Amsterdam were stable. There was clearly expansion as well as recovery from the slump of the 1620s. These exports of industrial materials point to industrial growth in western Europe. The cloth industries of Reims and Amiens recovered from the disasters of the late sixteenth century and then expanded until about 1635, after which production fell. The textile industries of the southern Netherlands recovered and the linen industry expanded down to 1640. The woollen industries of Gand and Bruges probably reached higher outputs than in the sixteenth century. In the north the growth of Leiden's cloth output slackened 1620-33, but then went on to reach its peak 1654-65. Despite the decline of the old draperies in England after 1618, the new draperies expanded until 1640 and a silk industry was established. Some of this growth was no doubt at the expense of Italy, just as some of the growth of shipping and trade was at her expense and that of the Iberian Powers. The longer and cruder index of shipping through the Sound in Table 2 suggests that there was no sudden fall after 1660 and that the level remained appreciably greater than that of a hundred years earlier. TABLE 2. Dutch ships westwards through the Sound (annual averages) (I) (2) (3) No. of ships Snapper* total in 1,000s lasts Jeanninf average Dutch ships in lasts (4) (1) x (3) in 1,000s lasts 1562-8 1574-80 1581-90 1,343 1,014 1,321 98-7 60-9 79-4 47 f70 /II2-0 1591-1600 I,6oi 102-6 I60 X 96-1 72 84 95 95-3 141 "5 99-8 no 110-4 1601-10 1611-20 1,337 1,684 967 139 "8 1621-30 1631-40J 1641-50 1651-7 1661-70 1,048 1,004 1,156 887 681 111-o 124-0 161-8 124-2 95-3 40 40 140* 140* 140* 53-7 40-6 636 — — — * F. Snapper, Oorlogsinvloeden op de Overzeese Handel van Holland1$51-1719 (Amster- dam, 1959), pp. 312-14. t Jeannin, Le Navire et Veconomie maritime du Nord de VEurope; 3e Colloque Internal, d'histoire maritime (Paris, i960), pp. 58-61; ships at Konigsberg. J Eight years only. The agrarian sector was doubtless more fundamental. Here again there are indications of early depression east of the Elbe (see Fig. 5, below, p. 93) and the amount of land reclaimed in the Netherlands fell sharply after 1664 (see Fig. 4, below, p. 92). It has also been argued that grain yields fell generally in the seventeenth century, but there is no convincing 64 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008GENERAL INTRODUCTION evidence of this except for Poland. There are indications that yields in England may have risen, but elsewhere it seems likely that yields remained stationary. However, one new crop with higher yields, maize, was spreading in northern Spain, Italy and southern France. Its use in Italy has been regarded as an impoverishment of popular diet, but in the long run it must have made subsistence easier. Information about the movement of rent remains extremely patchy. As we have seen in Lombardy the return from land fell after 1623. In England rents rose considerably and probably faster than prices 1600-40. They soon recovered from the Civil War, but probably failed to go on rising in the 1660s. In the southern Netherlands a few leases show rents rising much faster than prices from 1600 to the 1640s, then falling. French experience was various. In Beauvaisis and Haut Poitou rents rose till 1650. In Picardy rents returned 1600-30 to levels reached before 1570, were reduced again by war and then recovered temporarily to higher levels in the 1660s. Rents of small parcels of land near Paris fell steeply in the 1590s; they then rose steadily 1600-70, but only passed their former levels in the 1630s. In Languedoc and Provence rents also rose until about 1670. In Languedoc they had risen no faster than grain prices in the sixteenth century, but after 1600 they rose considerably faster; by 1650 measured in grain they had risen 50-100%, in money 100-150%. Probably the main reason for increasing rents was competition for holdings as population had increased. The farmer's margin of profit was under twofold attack. Le Roy Ladurie considers that direct taxation had not risen faster than prices down to 1610. From about 1625 this changed; by 1650 taxes calculated in grain at constant prices had more than doubled. The taille took 6-2% of gross revenue in the 1580s and 13% in 1650. It had become a heavier burden than tithe and apparently replaced it as the main target of peasant unrest. It should be remembered that indirect taxes had also risen considerably and that the taille in Languedoc was less burdensome than in many other regions. In Languedoc seig- neurial dues were of minor importance, but in other regions, such as Burgundy, they were the means whereby landowners increased their share of revenue from land at the peasants' expense. In such circumstances individual peasants as well as village communities became indebted and sales of peasant strips and communal lands and rights often followed. Many purchasers were officers, not only from the high robe as at Dijon, but also lesser ones who had largely replaced merchants as the municipal oligarchs at Amiens. Some in Burgundy and elsewhere belonged to old noble families or were village oligarchs [coqs de village]. But many bought rent charges because they wanted a secure income. Historians generally deplore such manifestations of rentier ambitions with their avoidance of entrepreneurial risks, as a victory for attitudes hostile to rational economic behaviour. Yet given the risk of trade and of direct 65 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR exploitation of land, especially in the 1640s and 1650s, was the preference for security so irrational? The borrowers by means of rent charges were probably mainly nobles and peasants, but at Amiens it was the peasants who were most likely to end by losing their land. Although rent charges were clearly an important form of investment in most of Europe, we are still very ignorant of their real economic significance in different countries and how interest rates really worked. Interest rates were falling every- where in this period, though again the chronology and significance of this remains obscure. But it would seem that large and long-term borrowers were in a much better position than in the sixteenth century, while peasants were usually the last to feel the benefit of falling interest rates. They were the victims of war and peace throughout most of Europe west and east of the Elbe. Upon their acceptance of their fate and upon the interplay of other political and social groups which sometimes gave some of them hopes of protection or even prosperity, the history of this as of other periods is founded. If peasants, apart from the coqs de village, were victims of society, even poor ones might help to victimize local scapegoats as witches. Witchcraft can be seen as a mechanism which by attributing misfortunes, especially sickness, to ill will by others makes life endurable for those who lack knowledge and means to control the hazards of living at the margins of subsistence. From the fifteenth century churchmen distinguished between natural and demoniac ('black') magic. This distinction might ensure immunity for intellectuals reviving hermetic traditions but not for village sorcerers, normally engaged in fortune telling, curative spells, or divining for lost objects, though always liable to be suspected of interfering with fertility in men, animals and plants. Witch hunts, led by evangelists of Protestant or Catholic reform or by learned magistrates, meant wholesale torture of suspects nominated by local resentments. This produced con- fessions of the Satanic compacts and Sabbats prescribed by learned hand- books, followed by executions of widening circles of alleged participants. In this period there were probably more victims than ever, particularly in Germany; yet James I, Spanish inquisitors, the German Jesuit Spee and French parlementaires all became convinced that the standard procedures and confessions were false. The same arguments had had no effect in the sixteenth century, but now they gradually influenced judicial proceedings. The machinery of witch-hunting had perhaps over-reached itself by suc- cessfully establishing its beliefs at a really popular level. By 1650 libertins blamed such beliefs on popular superstition, while in France and the Basque lands popular demands for extirpation of witches were increasingly thwarted by higher judicial authorities. If some economic historians think of this period as 'the end of the long sixteenth century', it was also the beginning of a long seventeenth century in which the cultural traditions and social and political structures of Europe's ancien regime matured. 66 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008CHAPTER II THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1609-50 T HE structures and activity of the international economy probably changed more substantially in the sixteenth century than in the century which followed. In the earlier period the opportunitities offered by a series of remarkable explorations and maritime discoveries progressively altered the volume of commerce and industry, and indeed the general perspectives of the world as then known. Vasco da Gama, during his notable voyage in 1497-8, managed to turn the southern cape of Africa and open a new way to the old riches of the Indies, to the pepper and spices, the silks, cottons and pearls, the perfumes, drugs and other merchandise which through the centuries had largely coloured the con- spicuous consumption of Europe. In another direction the frail expedition of Christopher Columbus, touching land in the West Indies in October 1492, led the way for fleets of successors to a fresh continent across the Atlantic. This held forth immense stocks of precious metals and tropical produce, which Europe did not have but was eager to exploit. However, the arrival of these resources—sometimes new, often in abundance—did not find its full explanation in the wavering fortunes of discovery, con- quest and plunder. As the new territories grew in stature, they disgorged materials which found their place as commodities in a highly developed market system. Europe received them, not free but at the cost of increased output from her economy. These international outlets came in the wake of territorial conquest and implied expanding export sectors beyond the natural growth of European trade. They helped to widen the outlook on a world of apparently unknown possibilities, encouraging a penchant for intrepid adventure, to which the only limit seemed to be the capacity for enterprise and endeavour. All this contributed collectively a massive human achievement. But in the seventeenth century the panorama had clearly changed. Although the scale of economic enterprise in real terms was considerably greater than a century before, the rate of growth was less significant. Although Europe had grown more populous, more skilful and more wealthy, its activity had also become relatively less flexible, albeit more lethargic. It is possible that as economic development progressed, marginal returns from new resources fell. Indeed, the volume of trans- actions seemed to have risen beyond the capacities of those resolute, tight-mouthed and calculating merchant magnates, the Fuggers and Welsers of Augsburg, the Spinolas and Grimaldis of Genoa, the Stroga- novs in Russia, to name a few, who in spite of all their outstanding 67 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR achievements were relayed by great corporative undertakings, companies under joint management, which took the lead. The East India Company in England and the famous Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie of the United Provinces, for example, asserted monopoly rights and acted under the shadow and protection of their respective states. In time these commercial organizations became more diversified, with objectives often indistinguishable from the policies of government. They embodied mer- cantile theories and advice emanating from such men as Laffemas and Montchretien, Thomas Mun and Gerald Malynes, Johann Risingh, Duarte Gomes Solis and other advisers in Europe. State protection, whether effective or presumptive, had the disadvantage that commercial and industrial activity came to bear a mounting burden of impositions inseparable from political aggrandizement. Royal regulations, navigation acts and attitudes, which have been conveniently lumped together under the title of Mercantilism, were the price to pay for changing structures of power and initiative in the different economies. As in many other spheres of life Europe faced a surfeit of government. Only more successful times, turned to advantage by the convinced champions of free trade, could prune the exigencies of Leviathan, embodiment of state power. Such concepts nevertheless take us beyond the period of this chapter which within the limits of 1609 and 1650 admittedly has a certain unity by the norms of traditional history. It opens on the one hand with the Twelve Years Truce (9 April 1609) signed by the deputies of Philip III of Spain and of the Estates of the insurgent United Provinces; and closes on the other hand with the Peace of Westphalia (24 October 1648), which combined both the Treaty of Osnabruck and the separate Treaty of Miinster. The Peace of 1648 was destined to settle many of the outstanding power problems so ferociously disputed in the Thirty Years War, but left Spain and France to fight on until the settlement in the Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659). Can the international economy claim an equally valid compartment in the history of Europe? It would be simple enough indeed to find economic analogies to the limits of this period. Did not, after all, the Spanish monarchy again declare itself bankrupt in 1607, unpapering another crack in this dominant economy on the high tide of its affairs, at the beginning of a century filled with rebuffs and bitterness? Was not 1609 also the founding year for the great Wisselbank of Amsterdam, that unmistakable sign of the financial ascendancy of the astute and nimble Dutch Republic? And again, at the close of the period, we find the whole or almost the whole of Europe in 1648-52 shaken by a cycle of violent price fluctuations, a severe crisis of subsistence typical of the seventeenth century, and perhaps of all econo- mies before the Industrial Revolution. Yet such events, whether haphazard, isolated or linked together, do not make the setting of this chapter. It is necessary to establish the unity 68 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY I6OO.-5O of the first half of the seventeenth century as a phase in the economic development of Europe justifiable in itself. Between 1609 and 1650 or perhaps more precisely between 1590 and 1650, a culminating point and watershed was reached in that long phase of prosperity—the long sixteenth century as Fernand Braudel has aptly called it—which had sus- tained the economic evolution of Europe since the mid-fifteenth century. The final surge, already filled with hesitations and uncertainties, covered the first half of the seventeenth century. It was a double phenomenon. In the first place, the turning point of this long development was spread over a fairly wide period of time, commensurately long we should say with the phase which preceded it. It would indeed be difficult, when deal- ing with such long secular movements, to fix a precise year, an exact crisis valid for the entire international economy. The movement was similar to the turn of a high tide, when some time must pass at slack water before the observer can say for certain that the ebb has set in. This chapter covers a similar reversal in the economic history of Europe. It probably lasted half a century. The second aspect: the economic down-turn was not of the same nature for all the countries of the continent of Europe. The evolution of this polyvalent economy followed a complex pattern, and long-term growth and recession did not necessarily affect all the regions of Europe in the same way. For some, as in the case of Spain and many Mediterranean countries, the turn of the sixteenth century proved to be a major crisis affecting their position at the head of European affairs and foreshadowed decline. This was an absolute upset, unseating a dominant economy and its dependants. For other economies, as the later developments in Holland and England were to show, the series of setbacks in the early seventeenth century were only stages in a march to economic pre-eminence, a series of difficult crises, which the whole of Europe shared in varying degrees. Being less directly absorbed in the concentration of power characterized by the rise of Spain, they resisted longer than the others. Such a difference in economic temperament serves to emphasize the inherent disparity of Europe, which the prosperity of the sixteenth century had confronted, accentuated but failed entirely to resolve. This dramatic period covered in large measure by the years 1609 to 1650 constitutes a part of what has been aptly described as the crisis of the seventeenth century. This was a huge movement, much wider than the material civilization of Europe itself, which was obliged to hesitate, pause and re-form. Such a crisis was not confined to one year alone, to one place, to one catastrophe. It took form slowly in the context of the whole of Europe in half a century of slumps, bankruptcies and shocks of war, and in effect prepared for a new phase in the long continuity of economic history. The problem in its full complexity still remains relatively new. The empirical data for the discussion often leave much to be desired 69 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR and the tentative conclusions presented here must wait for future studies to clear up the many obscure aspects of changes in this period. In this chapter, the varying crisis in different sectors—population; money, prices and wages; trade and production—must claim our attention in turn, through at least some thirty years of European war, with its inevitable wastages and destruction. The problems of population growth in the early seventeenth century, perhaps typically of pre-industrial economies, remained fundamental to economic activity. The level of human population indeed implied at once the available supply of labour—the working force and intelligence to husband the land and ply the crafts—and at the same time constituted the potential aggregate consumption of the different communities. Since population growth was in the nature of a cumulative process, sustained quantitative changes or even retardation in the rate of increase may be understood to have had wide repercussions which are difficult to estimate not only in absolute terms but also in the risks and uncertainties en- countered by economic enterprise. Through the long growth of the sixteenth century, the inhabitants experienced increases in numbers, relatively of considerable significance. In 1600, according to Joseph Kulischer, Europe—that is the larger Europe west of the Urals—could claim some 95,000,000. By 1650, another estimate by Carr-Saunders sets this population at some 100,000,000. These figures, however, are extremely uncertain and others can be sug- gested in their place. The still valid data and methods of Julius Beloch propose, for a smaller-sized Europe however, an overall figure in the region of 80,000,000 about which the population fluctuated. The Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals of some 100,000,000 held a position in the world roughly the same as today, about one-fifth of the earth's population. According to the same estimates, Asia added some 330,000,000; Africa stood at about the same level as Europe, although this is no doubt hasty and over-generous; America, 13,000,000; and Oceania, 1,000,000. Total: 545,000,000. In my opinion a lower figure, perhaps even as low as some 450-460,000,000, would be more acceptable. The margin of error in these estimates remains significantly high. The whole question indeed is largely undecided and open to conjecture. The distribution of the different regional populations also probably altered during the period under survey. It would be difficult to follow such changes in a period as brief as the first half of the seventeenth cen- tury, but estimates by A. P. Usher and Julius Beloch exist for the whole century. Some countries, important at the beginning, had declined in numbers by the end of the century. Germany passed from about 20,000,000 to 15,500,000 and the Low Countries from 3,000,000 to 2,700,000. 70 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 France, however, with the territories solidly acquired by Mazarin and Louis XIV in 1648 and 1659, probably rose from about 16,000,000 to 20,000,000. These three groups together registered a slight decrease from 39,000,000 in 1600 to 38,200,000 in 1700. Spain and Italy also may have declined from 8,000,000 and 13,000,000 to 7,300,000 and 11,300,000 respectively in 1700. But can we accept all these assessments as correct? By the middle of the seventeenth century it is possible that the total population of Europe had suffered a notable recession. In some areas this was apparently severe. The inhabitants of Italy may have declined by twenty per cent; of Germany in general by a third, of Bohemia by half, of Moravia by a third. A recent estimate for northern France suggests that a fall in population levels set in after 1640. On the outer fringe of Europe, there were signs of depopulation in Anatolia. All this tends to corroborate the hypothesis of an over-all decline by the middle of the century. But the data are still based on regional estimates and it is often difficult to assess fully the aggregate effects of inter-regional migrations. By the end of the century, however, this temporary depression had probably been overcome and declines in some areas were compensated by advances in others. Germany in particular had managed in all probability by about 1700 to repair its great losses and return to the population level of 1600. There is a further indicator of internal population changes in the density of inhabitants. About 1600, the three most densely populated countries were: Italy (with 114 to the square mile); the Netherlands (with 104); and France (with 88). By 1700 the Austrian Netherlands showed a remarkable human concentration (137 per square mile compared with 98 for the United Provinces): Italy had 102; France, 95. Again such estimates are tentative, but the conclusions tend to coincide with the general knowledge of the period. At least to some extent, losses in the south of Europe were adjusted by gains in the north—in the Low Countries, the British Isles and Scandinavia, which went ahead by comparison with the Mediter- ranean countries and the Iberian Peninsula. The general readjustment in Europe's population was also apparent in the relative positions of the great cities. In the first half of the seventeenth century some of the notable centres of the 'Mediterranean' economy tended to lag or even decline—such as Messina, Palermo, Seville and Antwerp, the financial hub of Spanish affairs in the north. Others such as Amsterdam, Madrid and Vienna advanced—the two latter, both con- tinental capitals and administrative centres for vast empires, may be considered as important signs of structural change. During the seventeenth century two other great capitals of Europe—Paris and London— managed to pass the mark of 400,000 inhabitants. Paris, wealthy, brilliant but dangerous as the Fronde revealed, was soon to drive the grand monarque to the magnificence of Versailles; London, thriving and looking to the prosperity ahead, was destined to surpass in size all the other cities of Europe. 71 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR London, indeed, was an example of exceptional urban success. When John Stow first published his Survey (1598), it had a well-established position as port, capital and economic focus of the country. It absorbed citizens in search of work or amusement. It offered asylum from persecu- tion in other parts of Europe, as the Flemings crowding into Billingsgate indicated. By 1603, with perhaps as many as 170,000 inhabitants, it was already disproportionately large for England, standing out, as James I disdainfully remarked, 'like a head of a rickety child'. And there were protests. In 1596 the council had complained to the Middlesex magistrates of' the multitudes of base tenements and houses of unlawful and disorderly resort in the suburbs'. But the city continued to grow majestically through the seventeenth century, sprawling beyond the medieval walls and moats, often still in place, out into the liberties and still again into the outparishes. At the end of the century, Gregory King proposed a likely population of 550,000 inhabitants. The deaths recorded in the bills of mortality also give some idea of this expansion. TABLE 3 Period City (97 parishes) Liberties Outparishi 1604-23 1624-43 1644-63 1664-83 1684-1703 48,000 58,000 59,000 61,000 56,000 74,000 98,000 109,000 120,000 134,000 31,000 55,000 70,000 189,000 145,000 While the recorded deaths in the City remained almost stationary, they doubled in the liberties and quintupled in the outparishes. By the 1660s the outparishes returned the greatest number, although this superiority over the combined totals from the City and the liberties became per- manent only after the 1680s. London in the seventeenth century, indeed, bore the mark of success, surviving the Great Plague (1665) and the Fire (1666). On all sides, as F. J. Fisher has observed, the capital displayed itself as a notable centre of conspicuous consumption. If in all probability the total population of Europe stagnated or even receded in the middle of the seventeenth century, there were some very good reasons. The inhabitants faced the severe setbacks which most societies have experienced when pushed to the limits of their resources. The perennial scourges of mankind—famine, pestilence and war—struck the communities of Europe perhaps more insistently, more disastrously during this period. The famines of the type suffered by the Ancien Regime were more often due to a series of bad harvests which exhausted the meagre reserves in hand. Their severity in the early seventeenth century has been linked to the deterioration in climatic conditions, to that long spell of cold and 72 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 unfavourable weather experienced in Europe after 1600. The evidence of larch trees at Berchtesgaden suggests that growth was twice as great before 1600 as after. In Switzerland and Iceland, glaciers probably reached their first maximum limits in the middle of the seventeenth century. The existence of this long-term climatic fluctuation, however, in the present state of our empirical knowledge, must remain an open question. Certainly, there were cases of exceptional harvest failures and famines. In Russia, in 1601, a catastrophic dearth lasted three years, which caused, so it was reported, some 120,000 deaths in Moscow alone, and brought the starving peasants crowding into the city for alms. When this finally was refused, they left to die by the roadside in great numbers. Western Europe, notwithstanding its relative commercial sophistication, suffered two severe bouts of dearth: in 1628-30 and in 1648-52. The first cycle probably reached its peak in the spring of 1629. In Udine, between May 1627 and May 1629, the price of wheat quadrupled, and the cheaper grains, such as rye and maize, the staple diet of the poor and the greatest sufferers, rose even more steeply. In England in 1630, the price of wheat rose above sixty shillings the quarter. But these grim years in Europe have little to compare with the disasters which tightened condi- tions in other parts of the world at this time. In India, in the Gujerat, a Dutch observer records a terrible series of years an excessive drought, so that the crops withered and the cattle starved in the fields, then in 1631 such continuous and unusual heavy rains that the rivers overflowed and covered the land, destroying whole stretches of country, towns and many villages, and ruining the standing crops, which were most promising. The result was a great famine and horrible mortality both of men and cattle . . . Grain prices rose twenty times; cannibalism was rife but a still more horrible sight was seen: the village named Susuntra, where human flesh was sold openly in the market... in the years which followed, these calamities began to cease and food began to grow at the former price, but still the present days and abundance of provisions are not to be compared with former times. May God Almighty preserve all Christian countries from such plagues . . . The second cycle of high food prices was exceptionally acute in 1649-50. Cloudbursts in 1649 and consequent harvest failures prepared the way for winter and early spring months of extreme difficulty. The phenomenon was present over large areas of Europe, in Italy and England, in France and Poland. Between 1645-6 and 1649-50, the price of wheat more or less doubled in England and France, and trebled in Italy. In Lwow in Poland the price of oats between 1643 and 1651 rose eight times (see Fig. 1). The direct effects of famines on the total size of Europe's population, however, are difficult to measure with certainty. Crop failures, or even a series of crop failures, wrought their disastrous effects not so much 4 73 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008 M H FDECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR MAX. Min. MAX. Min. Exeter Beauvais Rozay en Brie Siena Fig. i. A wheat crisis in Europe, 1639-60 [reference: F. Braudel and F. C. Spooner, Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Vol. iv, ed. E. E. Rich and C. H. Wilson (1967)]. The movement of prices is shown as an index, based on the period from the fourth quarter 1639 to the first quarter 1640 (= 100). directly through famine deaths as indirectly through the diseases asso- ciated with pernicious undernourishment. Any question of food shortages turned inevitably on the not less important question of the adequacy of food consumption. The standards of nutrition probably deteriorated in the seventeenth century. This has been suggested in the case of Poland. In Italy after 74 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 the difficult years of the 1620s and 1630s there were signs of inferior diets. In Udine the cheaper maize, destined to become the staple food of the poor, appeared in the official market lists from September 1622. There also from 1668, mixtures of grains and pulses were officially quoted— wheat and rye; wheat, rye and lentils; maize, sorghum and buckwheat; and others—substitutes and signs of distress, which disappeared only after the middle of the eighteenth century. In Sweden, the food budgets for the manor of Gripsholm show a decline in the daily intake of calories: TABLE 4 Year Daily consumption of calories 1555 1638 1653 1661 4.166 2,480 2,883 2,920 It would be very convenient to accept this example of Gripsholm as evidence of growing malnutrition and exposure to disease in the general crisis of the seventeenth century. But can these food estimates in Scandi- navia prove the case? It is within the realm of possibility that other biological factors also played a part in the changing structure of Europe's population, including overcrowding, insecurity and general stress. Certainly, severe epidemics struck Europe in the seventeenth century. The housing problems of the cities faced town authorities with the dangers of filth and poor hygiene. London was no exception. Piped water was a rarity, and households even after the opening of the new river in 1613 were largely supplied by water carriers from the public conduits. The crowded suburbs, with buildings quickly thrown up to meet the pressure for housing, became breeding grounds for disease and particularly for rat-borne plague. The plagues of 1603, 1625, 1636 and later the great plague of 1665, according to Charles Creighton, appeared first and made their greatest ravages in the suburbs. The plague of 1636, to cite another notable instance, was severe in Newcastle (Northumberland), growing rapidly to meet the expanding coal trade. Scarcely a year passed without a serious outbreak of some sort or other. There were bouts of fever, cholera, the 'sweating sickness', as well as the plague which made its last serious appearances as an epidemic sickness in the seventeenth century. The form of war typhus associated with Europe reached a peak in the Thirty Years War with the inevitable sieges, pitched battles and pillaging of marauding armies. England came to know its gravity in 1643 in the Civil War. And heavy plague years were often bad years for deaths from other diseases: in London typhus fever in 75 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008 «"•DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR 1625 and 1636, and smallpox in 1641, claimed many victims. Dysentery— the 'griping of the guts' as the mortality bills described it after 1658— appeared more frequently in the records of the seventeenth century. Although plague did not strike alone, it was the great killer. In Italy in the wake of the dearths of 1628-9 the plague of 1630 made terrible inroads on the population. In that year alone, according to Julius Beloch, a million and a half died in the peninsula, of whom two-thirds perished in the plain of Lombardy. Bologna, the city and district taken together, lost 29,698; Venice, Chioggia and Malamocco 46,490 (about 35% of the inhabitants); Padua about 17,000 (44%); Verona, city and suburbs together, 31,000 (59%); Parma about 20,000 (50%); Cremona about 25,000 (60%). The plague of 1656 was less severe but nevertheless was notable in Liguria and the kingdom of Naples. The cities of Genoa and Naples probably lost as many as half of their inhabitants. These figures, clearly, can be accepted only after allowing for some measure of exaggeration and margins of error in counting. Such losses sometimes halved the urban populations and left scars which were difficult to efface. Milan, which had had a population of 180,216 in the time of Borromeo, after 1630 claimed about 100,000. After the great plague in 1630, Bologna had fallen from 65,000 to 46,747 in 1631. Venice with a population of 142,804 in 1624, held 98,244 in 1633. There the pestilence made its greatest inroads on the poor, as can be seen from the changing percentages between the main social groups: TABLE 5 Year Nobles (nobiles) 1624 1633 % 39 4-0 Burgesses (cittadini) 0/ Inhabitants (popolani) 0/ /o /o 7-4 io-6 887 854 Genoa with 68,000 inhabitants in 1608 was reduced to 38,360 in 1660. The Netherlands also suffered heavy losses. Haarlem lost 5,723 in the plague of 1655. Leiden, with 44,745 inhabitants in 1622, lost 9,897 in 1624-5, 14,582 in 1635, and 10,529 in 1655. Amsterdam sustained nine noteworthy attacks between 1617 and 1664, of which four were particularly grave: 11,795 deaths in 1624 (or 1 in 9); 17,193 in 1636 (1 in 7); 16,727 in 1655 (1 in 8); and 24,148 in 1664 (1 in 6). This great financial centre paid heavily indeed for the prosperous expansion of its affairs. And in London, the same terrible record. In 1603 some 30,000 are said to have died from the plague. The same disease claimed 35,417 in the period from May to November 1625. In the year of the Great Plague of 1665, the deaths recorded were as follows: 76 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 TABLE 6 Year Plague Fever Smallpox Total deaths 1665 68,596 5,257 655 97,306 These were clearly greater than in 1630, 1636, and 1647, when the losses could represent perhaps as many as a quarter of the inhabitants. The third great setback to the population of Europe was the destruction of war. For thirty years this misfortune coursed across the battle-grounds of Germany, and although most countries on the continent felt its effects, the empire was the greatest sufferer. Here and there according to the estimates of Giinther Franz the losses were immense, but not all the regions were affected in the same way. Some areas—the north-west fringe, Austria and the cantons of Switzerland—came through the trials almost unscathed. Others were less gravely tested: Moravia, Saxony and Silesia had losses of 15 to 20%. The rest of Germany, however, bore the brunt of the conflict. Some regions lost 40%; Bohemia, Branden- burg, Magdeburg, Thuringia, Bavaria and Franconia were reduced by half. Some estimates for Mecklenburg, Pomerania, Coburg and Hesse, the Palatinate and Wurtemberg put the losses at 60 to 70%, while in pockets between Augsburg, Nuremburg and Stuttgart the losses in some rural districts could have risen as high as four-fifths, towns being reduced to the level of villages. With the direct losses of war came disease and starvation, heaping disaster on disaster. Much still remains to be known about these dark and sorry years in German history. TABLE 7 Origin Low Countries Belgium France Germany Others In percentages 1655-9 Destination 1590-4 Amsterdam Leiden Middelburg Amsterdam Leiden Middelburg Amsterdam Leiden Middelburg Amsterdam Leiden Middelburg Amsterdam Leiden Middelburg 50-4 155 180 34-3 53-3 721 1-8 26-8 58 II-2 30 1-9 1-8 1-3 2-2 53-6 41-2 439 50 152 30-5 37 182 136 28-8 216 3-3 69 32 8-7 77 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR Yet the absolute level of such losses still remains open to conjecture. It is difficult to dissociate deaths from the redistribution of population through emigration. There were open cities, places of refuge, such as Amsterdam, London, Constantinople and many others, ready to absorb migrants. Something of the scale of such movements can be seen from the origins of newcomers to Amsterdam, Leiden and Middelburg, between 1590-4 and 1655-9 (see Table 7). After some sixty years the majority of the newcomers to these cities arrived from the drift to the cities in the Netherlands, or from Germany rather than, as at the end of the sixteenth century, from the Low Countries under Spanish control. Both these areas in turn had been trouble-spots and so the exodus from theatres of war thus contributed to the general redistribution of population. n The link between population problems and the waning prosperity of the sixteenth century is by no means easy to measure from the tentative estimates of population: redistribution and migrations, as we have seen, cloud the issues. The sectors of money and prices, however, fix more precisely both the turning points and the changing relationships between the different regions of the international economy in the early seventeenth century. Monetary problems received a good deal of publicity in the writings of contemporary bullionists and mercantilists. Bullion served ultimately to adjust trading balances and underwrite a credit system, which was rarely able to venture very far from final settlements in coin. The prosperity of the long sixteenth century had been marked by an astonishing increase in the precious metals at the disposal of Europe, from Africa, from Europe itself, and finally from the extraordinary mines of Mexico and Peru. By far the greater part had been counted through the House of Trade—the Casa de la Contratacion—in Seville. Spain became the pressure point for the monetary circulations of Europe. This state of affairs underwent radical changes in the early seventeenth century, even though at first sight little seemed to have altered. The fleets of galleons arrived irregularly under heavy convoy from the New World. Only once did they fail to make port and this was a day indeed for jubila- tion among the enemies of Spain. In 1628 Admiral Pieter Pieterzoon Heyn (1578-1629), commanding the squadrons of the Dutch West India Com- pany, waylaid and captured the larger part of the treasure-fleet, taking it in triumph to Amsterdam to provide the company shareholders with a 50% dividend. But this was a rare event. Spain did not easily relinquish her position as the centre for bullion in Europe. All the documents bear witness to this reality. After 1685, when Cadiz assumed the place of Seville, the centre of high pressure had hardly shifted. 78 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY I 6 O 9 - 5 O The real crisis came when that pressure began to fade. The shipments of bullion reached their peak point in the decade of the 1590s and declined through the seventeenth century (see Fig. 2). By the 1640s the cargoes of gold were 8% of those in the 1590s and silver had fallen to 39%. TABLE 8. Average annual imports of gold and silver in Seville from the New World, in kilograms Period Gold Silver 1591-1600 1641-50 1,945 155 270,763 105,643 Various explanations have been proposed for this failure to maintain the position of the sixteenth century: difficulties of labour, mining and extraction; of obtaining cheap mercury for the amalgamation process. In addition, it must be observed that in the eighteenth century (see Fig. 6) when the New World again experienced expanding production of precious metals, it was Mexico not Peru which led the way. To all appear- ances, Peru was the greatest loser in the early seventeenth century. The drain of silver to the East directly across the Pacific has also been sug- gested as a possible factor. The recent study of Pierre Chaunu, however, rejects this hypothesis and shows that the movement of Spanish trade between Acapulco and Manila followed the general trend of trade in the Atlantic: it was in decline from the decade 1606-15. The problem was probably more general. The production of gold and silver like other industrial sectors fell victim to the relentless law of diminishing marginal returns and declining profits. From the monetary point of view an important turning point was taken. The sixteenth century had passed its prime. Yet, while the additions to the stocks of gold and silver money declined, the requirements for circulating medium continued to grow with advanc- ing prosperity, expanding transactions and rising price-levels in some cases prolonged through the Thirty Years War. Silver was particularly required for settling debtor trading balances. Bullion flowed from Spain, where it was relatively abundant, to the less well-endowed areas of Europe's economy: to Poland, eastern Europe and Russia, whose com- mercial systems grew more and more accustomed to a money economy; to the Levant, India, the East Indies and China, where silver coins espe- cially the famous Spanish piece of eight reals gave merchants the advan- tage of a buyer's market. From Venice alone in 1610-14, the silver Spanish reals officially exported to the Levant amounted to six per cent of the silver being imported at Seville. Although this was an important trading centre, it was not the only outlet. We must also take into account 79 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR 1450 1500 1550 I \\ i r r i i r T T Ratio scale for | nortiinal wheat prices 1600 1650 1700 1750 10 q 8 - 7 - 6 " 5 " 4 - 3 - 2- In thousands of pesos -35,000 -30,000 35,000 30,000 -20,000 20,000 -10,000 10,000 I No. of units of silver per unit of gold 16 - -15 10 10" xli. 1450 I I I 1500 I I I I 1550 I I i i i r I I I I 1600 1650 1700 I 1750 Fig. 2. (a) Average nominal prices of wheat in Europe; (b) average prices of wheat in grams of silver per hectolitre; (c) the value of imports of gold and silver at Seville [reference: E. J. Hamilton, American Treasure and the Price Revolution in Spain 1501-1650 (Cambridge, Mass., 1934)]; (<0 the bimetallic ratios in Europe (ten-yearly averages). 80 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1609-50 the trade from ports such as Genoa, the financial dependency of Spain, from Leghorn, Naples, Marseilles, Barcelona . . . And in the north, the great East India Companies of Holland and England, the expeditions from France and Denmark commandeered silver for export with official permission. These were some indications of the demands on the declining supplies, and of the potential monetary difficulties, which characterized the early seventeenth century. In effect, a whole mercantile system was placed in jeopardy. Spain had attracted the attention of the great financial entrepreneurs, who found through Spain the required opening into both the bullion markets of Europe and the trade with the New World. The Fuggers and Welsers of Germany, the Spinolas of Genoa had not hesitated to throw themselves into the Spanish venture, forming liaisons which often, officially at least, lasted until the failures of the first half of the seventeenth century. This commercial activity enlivened the whole economic system, with its relays of fairs and bourses to adjust balances and settle international accounts. If this system had enjoyed smooth continuity, any change would at once have been more easily evident. In reality, however, the monetary and financial systems tended to respond to the irregular cadence of the treasure fleets arriving in Seville. Before these galleons made port, the money markets were tight, as merchants in their letters all over Europe testified. After the unloading of the treasure fleet, the markets one after another reported easier monetary conditions. For the early seventeenth century, the periods of tight money appeared longer and more persistently, precipitating shortages and even failures. These uncertainties acted as a restraining force on the interaction and expansion of the international economy at large. Such shortages naturally did not pass unheeded. The first serious effects, paradoxically enough, were felt in Spain, unsettled by the expenses of grandiose politics, increasingly unstable, as though the system was rotting at the core. There, too, the government intervened in the conscious effort to expand the monetary circulation and cull profits and revenue for itself. It ordered the minting of large quantities of copper maravedis. These were small coins which had their most severe repercussions on the daily life of the country. The estimates by Earl J. Hamilton of the quantities of this coin put into circulation are: TABLE 9 Value of copper coins issued, in Period 1599-1606 1617-19 1621-6 ducados (each worth 375 maravedis) 22 millions 5 millions 14 millions 8l Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR The nominal value of these masses of copper coin was further increased by restamping at higher currency rates in 1603, 1636, 1641 and 1651. In addition, the situation was aggravated by vast quantities of counterfeit copper money smuggled into the country. In this coinage the monarchy found only a stop-gap relief measure in a fevered effort to fill the coffers. Later the repercussions became all too evident and prepared the royal bankruptcies of 1607 and 1627. The economic consequences were indeed disastrous. Inevitably, the copper currency clogged the circulation, and true to the so-called Gres- ham's Law, drove out the more valuable silver and gold coins. At first, during the Twelve Years Truce, the effects were not painfully apparent. The premium on silver was about 1% in 1603, and rose slowly to 3% in 1619. But with the outbreak of the Thirty Years War and the renewed conflict with the United Provinces (1621), this premium rose unchecked, with peaks during the silver difficulties of 1626-8 and 1641-2. It reached 50% by the mid-seventeenth century. Such unstable monetary conditions constituted in reality a progressive devaluation, and were not mastered in Spain until the 1680s. The pernicious effects impressed observers abroad, as well as statesmen in Spain. They were pointed out as a lesson to all. Other governments used this expedient but with greater caution. France, although it had already used copper currency since 1578, intro- duced moderate quantities after 1609. In Sweden, copper currency assumed a more important role. There the mining and production of copper was under the close control of the Swedish monarchy and had at first prospered from the demand of the mints in Spain. Gustavus Adol- phus, himself hard pressed to finance his military campaigns in Europe, turned to this expedient in 1624. Copper coinage assumed a particular importance after 1626 when the foreign demand for Swedish copper fell after the stop on minting in Spain. The Swedish daler, veritable plates of copper, became so cumbersome that later in the eighteenth century they were carried on special sleds. This sort of difficulty later assured the suc- cess of the credit facilities offered by the Bank of Sweden, founded in 1656, which issued the first bank-notes of Europe. Copper currency flowed abroad. Further east in Moscow, copper provoked a further inci- dent, when the coinage, begun in 1656, culminated in a runaway inflation after 1661 and the famous 'copper riots' in 1663. In Germany, the governments also tampered with the currency during the Kipper- und Wipperzeit, a spell of monetary debasements and coin- clipping which shook the country at the outbreak of the Thirty Years War. These debasements were examples of hyperinflation even when measured by the official valuations. In Munich and Augsburg between 1617 and 1622 the silver equivalent of the Rechnungsgulden fell 88%; in Frankfurt between 1612 and 1622 the devaluation was 72%; in Leipzig between 82 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 1619 and 1622, 82%; in Vienna between 1619 and 1622, 74%; in Stras- bourg between 1619 and 1622, 66%. These brusque movements formed relatively short interludes, but the different economies were shaken and trade disrupted at a particularly delicate moment in the history of the empire. Only in the last decade of the seventeenth century was Europe able to overcome these difficulties, all too often provoked by government interference. A second aspect of the monetary crisis, which cannot be dissociated from the general insufficiency of monetary resources, was the rapid appreciation of gold. This resulted partly from the preponderance of silver over gold brought from the New World, which was particularly apparent in the first half of the seventeenth century. More silver was imported in 1601-60 than in 1503-1600, but far less gold. In 1503-1600 the ratio of silver to gold by weight was about 48 to i; in 1601-60, this ratio had risen to about 340 to 1. TABLE 10. Total gold and silver imported in Seville from the New World, in kilograms Period Gold Silver Ratio by weight 1503-1600 1601-60 153,564 27,769 7.439,142 9,447,673 1 : 48.44 1 :340.22 The value of gold in terms of silver consequently tended to increase. This was further augmented as gold was preferred for hoarding, since it tended to retain its value more easily than silver. About 1550, the average value of gold to silver in Europe was at an average ratio of about 1 to 11; by 1600 this had almost reached 1 to 12. By 1650 it had advanced to 1 to I4i, and by 1700 to about 1 to 15 or 15^ (see Fig. 2). It remained roughly at this level until after the 'Great Crisis' of 1873. The period of greatest change in the ratio of gold to silver was in the first half of the seventeenth century. This rapid transformation in the structures of gold values was most apparent in the highly advanced economies and particularly in the upper levels of the monetary system of Europe concerned with international trade and finance. The economic growth of the sixteenth century had been accompanied by a growing volume of bills of exchange passing through the great fairs and exchanges—the fairs of Medina del Campo, of Lyons and of Piacenza; through the exchanges of Venice, Paris, London or Amsterdam . . . These exchanges were often adjusted to a fictitious gold currency which thus assumed the role of an international accounting system, even though the actual payments may have been made in silver. 83 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR For Spain there was the gold escudo ox pistole; for France the icu d'or au soleil; for the fairs of Piacenza the scudi d'oro; and many others. The relative appreciation of gold threatened to disrupt the established rela- tionship between contracts and payments in real coin. The first was part of a complex change in the international economy itself. As the balance of economic affairs tended to shift away from the older centres of southern Europe to the smaller but more progressive economies of the north, the customary markets, fairs and commercial centres became less involved in trading bulk merchandise, but neverthe- less retained a primacy in exchange and financial dealings. It is not sur- prising, therefore, in the face of the changes in gold values, that here and there a double monetary system evolved, which on the one hand left the domestic system of accounts flexible to devaluations and freely conver- tible into gold and silver, but on the other hand stabilized the system of international payments by retaining customary values. The difference between the two levels of monetary circulation in effect showed that the international network of exchanges tended to diverge from the uncer- tainties of some of the domestic currency systems which were susceptible to devaluation and government manipulation. This was evident in the case of Spain and France. About 1600, in Spain the gold escudo (valued at 400 maravedis) and in France the gold icu au soleil (at 60 sols) were both real gold coins and standards of value for bills of exchange. The gold devaluation in Spain of 23 November 1609 and in France of September 1602 raised the escudo to 440 maravedis and the ecu to 65 sols in specie; but left the values of the escudo and the icu in bills of exchange at their old values, that is 400 maravedis and 60 sols respectively. Did this retention of the old system of exchange rates show that the international accounting had reached such an advanced level of homogeneity that merchants were little inclined to disrupt their habitual methods in dealings with countries of such major importance ? A second aspect of these changes was the establishment of the public banks. Some were already in existence such as the Banco dello Spirito Santo in Naples, or the venerable Banco di San Giorgio in Genoa. The latter, at the heart of the powerful mercantile republic in league with Spain, showed renewed vitality and reflected the changing needs: in 1606 it opened a new cartulario in scudi di cambi and later in 1625 another in moneta di Reali. Other banks were created to suit the needs of government finance. Venice had its Banco della Piazza, di Rialto (founded in 1587 and dissolved in 1637) and its Banco Giro (founded in 1619). In Amsterdam the famous Wisselbank was established by the ordinance of 31 January 1609. This was followed by similar banks in Middelburg in 1616, in Delft in 1621 and in Rotterdam in 1635. The Girobank was set up in Hamburg in 1619. Nuremberg had its bank from 1621. There were unsuccessful attempts to set up public banks in Spain in 1603 (by the Pragmatic of 84 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY I6O9.-5O Valladolid) and in France in 1607. Ostensibly they had the limited purpose of easing government finance, as well as of avoiding the dangers of defective currency and the risks entailed in shifting bullion and specie. But gradually they formed a means of facilitating international payments. In the Banco della Piazza of Venice (by the decree of the Senate of 1593), and in the Wisselbank (by the foundation charter of 1609), bills of exchange were ordered to be settled in the bank ledgers. In Venice this system was underwritten by the huge state reserves of gold and silver kept in the Deposito Grande (in 1609 these amounted to 9,173,170 ducats worth 204,290 kilograms of silver). In Amsterdam the average deposits (officially at 100%) in the vaults of the bank between 1650 and 1654 amounted to 8,520,211 florins, which (allowing for the premium on bank money), was equivalent to some 89,770 kilograms of silver. The massive position of Venice is thus demonstrated. These public banks formed relay points in the financial circuits and added stability to a network of exchanges distinct from the domestic monetary systems prone to devalua- tion. In the Banco Giro of Venice at least by 1621 there was a premium of 20% on converting bank money into current money. In Amsterdam, the premium was lower, reaching the level of about 4% in the 1670s. In the face of changing monetary conditions it is probable that the volume of credit also expanded in the first two decades of the seventeenth century. Merchants and financiers made increased use of endorsing bills of exchange and of the patto di ricorsa (which offered a brief period of credit during the time the bill circulated before being returned). In the Banco dello Spirito Santo in Naples, the balance of credits rose from 46,210 ducats in 1600 to 841,285 ducats on 10 June 1622. But such com- mercial confidence was relatively short-lived. The uncertainties imposed by the renewal of war and the pressures of government finance served only to emphasize the inflexibilities of the credit potential of Europe, where the monetary system remained largely tied to the restrictions of gold and silver. In the last resort, the gap between bullion supplies and the expansion of the different monetary systems inevitably resulted in devaluations. These in turn classified the relative positions of the various regional economies, where some more than others succeeded in maintaining then- standing. The more important national moneys of account, when reduced to their equivalents in silver, show the following changes between 1580-9 and 1650-4 (see Map 1). From these percentages, it can readily be seen that the economies of north-western Europe offered strong resistance. On the other hand, Poland, underdeveloped and largely dependent on agricultural products to sustain her position in the international markets, suffered most of all. At the outbreak of the Thirty Years War she shared in the wave of debase- ments of Germany, but did not recover to the same extent as her German 85 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR and Austrian neighbours. In a decade between 1617 and 1627 the grosz lost more than half its equivalent in silver. Again in the devaluations of 1663, it lost another half, although on this occasion Danzig avoided the collapse, refusing no doubt to pay its share of the war and leaving the continental cities, such as Krakow, Warsaw, Poznan, Lublin, Lwow and others to carry the burden. In this respect there was also an economic partition of Poland. TABLE II Country England HoUand Augsburg Spanish Netherlands Austria Frankfurt Venice France Spain Genoa Poland Name of money of account Index of silver values in 1650-4 (1580-9 = 100) Pound sterling 9677 Guilder Rechnungsgulden 84-23 8368 Florin 80-39 79-43 79-21 76-51 68-47 Rechengulden Rechnungsgulden Lira Livre toumois Maravedi Lira Grosz 6641 5541 3891 Finally, the writings of the mercantilists in the early seventeenth century underlined the effect of these monetary difficulties on contemporaries. The economy of the sixteenth century had grown accustomed to relatively large additions of bullion to smooth the working of international trade, to encourage the relays of merchants and substantiate their forecasts. The sagging conditions which obtained in the early seventeenth century often provoked confused explanations. 'We live', said Montchr6tien in 1615, 'not so much from trade in raw materials as from gold and silver.' The importance of money supplies held the attention of Malynes in the Lex Mercatoria, 'for if Money be wanting, trade doth decrease although commodities be abundant and good cheap'. And again in his Treatise of the Canker of England's Commonwealth (1601): 'the more ready money, either in specie or by exchange that our merchants should make their return by, the more employment would they make upon our home commodities advancing the price thereof which price would augment the quantity by setting more people on work'. The bullionists did not shrink from linking the quantity of specie with prices and full employment. Swelling reserves of bullion, rising prices and a mounting level of employ- ment were the outward signs of inner economic well-being: their derange- ment had causal links with depression. Their theories, even if discredited, form a pungent comment on the contemporary monetary difficulties and general economic conditions. 86 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 Holland I M Spanish Netherlands Poland Map 1. Index of silver devaluation in Europe, 1650-4. The segment in white shows the proportion of devaluation; the full circle represents the base-period 1580-9 (= 100). The study of the movements and structures of prices has, like that of money, added greatly to our knowledge of the international economy, for both the phases of development and the regional differences which were fundamental to the early seventeenth century. The first problem is one of general chronology. The transition from the prolonged inflation of the sixteenth century to the stable and then falling prices more characteristic of the seventeenth century is not a simple question. It presupposes that the prices of goods circulating in regional or international markets can be expressed in common monetary terms, usually in silver. In reality, the economic activity over large areas of Europe was mainly destined to satisfy home or local needs. It is therefore difficult to find a commodity widely served by international trade. Grain prices have firstly the advantage of being most abundantly recorded but secondly the disadvantage of relating to a bulky commodity, difficult to transport and store—two factors which loomed large in the final price. The silver prices of wheat show relatively clearly the down-turns in the different regions of Europe. The most highly advanced regions of Europe, which had been flooded with silver currency during the sixteenth century, were the first to experience a change in price trends. In Spain, the dominant economy, the inflation of silver prices apparently ended about 1600, and it is probable that the defeat of the Invincible Armada and the ensuing material difficulties coincided with a profound change in the economic 87 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR development of Spain. Italy also shared this experience. In Udine, Siena and Naples, the last decade of the sixteenth century was probably the high-tide mark to a long-term rise in prices. In south-east France, in Grenoble and Dauphine, the level for the 1590s was higher than any decade in the preceding or succeeding quarter-century, although the evidence is confused by the wars of the League. In general, it is probable that grain prices in silver for the towns in the western basin of the Medi- terranean reached their culminating point at the turn of the century, and consequently for them the first half of the seventeenth century meant recession in the levels of silver prices (see Fig. 2). 1 Further north the conditions were somewhat different. In Germany and Austria, the prolonged rise in price levels continued through the sixteenth century until the eve or the outbreak of the Thirty Years War and the monetary debasements of the Kipperjahre. The evidence, however, is very confused through the disturbances of war, but it is probable that from this peak point and at least by the 1630s a serious recession in price levels developed in the towns of Germany and Austria. In Speyer, Leipzig and Frankfurt this falling trend continued in the prices of all or almost all commodities until 1656-60; in Wiirzburg, Augsburg and Munich it lasted until 1671. There were brief crises en route due to Imperial or Swedish occupations, as in the case of Augsburg in 1626 and 1633-5, in Wiirzburg in 1631 and 1634, in Munich in 1632 and 1648-9. After 1656-60 and 1671, prices began to rise again in Germany and Central Europe, thus ending the serious recession which had marked the Thirty Years War and its immediate consequences. Some economic historians, and notably Maurice Elsas, have not hesitated to attribute this phenomenon to the loss of population and the heavy destruction of war. In general, we may assume that the price recession during the Thirty Years War and pro- gressive rise after 1656 and 1671 were different from the long-term experience of Europe and indicate that the price systems of Germany and Austria tended to detach themselves and form a particular case. Again in the north, Holland and England, enjoying relatively stable monetary conditions in the first half of the seventeenth century, offered a longer resistance to the downward pressures on prices. The inflation in almost all sectors continued until the 1640s. Only in the final stages of the Thirty Years War did the level of prices begin to fall, following a down- ward trend which continued until the first quarter of the eighteenth century. The down-turn in these small progressive economies of the north in effect set the closing limit to the long inflation of silver prices in the sixteenth century, inaugurated with the crumbling of the dominant econ- omy of Spain. Spread over almost half a century, it emphasizes the funda- mental disparity of the international economy. 1 For a more extensive demonstration of this, see Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Vol. iv, pp. 470-5. 88 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 The relative size and importance of this economy is certainly shown by the differences in price levels from region to region. The price range between those areas with high silver prices, such as Spain and Italy, and those with low silver prices as in Poland, had hardly advanced closer than a ratio of i to 6, or at most i to 5 in the first half of the seventeenth cen- tury. This gap was the natural mainspring of the grain trade, even when high transport costs were involved. Risks were considerable and the rates of marine insurance were high. In Amsterdam the rates during the Thirty Years War for Constantinople were as high as 18% in 1626; for Danzig 5% in 1630, although these fell to 5% and 2% respectively in November 1648 after the signing of peace. The dangers and losses of war, high freight costs and a low level of capital investment all combined to maintain con- siderable differentials between regional prices. The third discrepancy which the growth of the sixteenth century had emphasized was the gap between the sectors of agriculture and industry. The long inflation, furthered by the pressure of a hungry population, culminated in the astonishing rise in the prices of farm products, parti- cularly of grain. The agricultural sector probably enjoyed, as wheat prices show, a privileged position until the end of the Thirty Years War, attracting investment and bringing marginal lands into cultivation. This was accompanied no doubt by an increase, in the Ricardian sense, in the rents of the better lands. Hans-Helmut Wachter has shown the fall in marginal profits in the case of east Prussia after 1620 and during the Thirty Years War. There the position was reversed in favour of a general contraction of the area under cultivation (see Fig. 5). In general the down- turn in the price of grain implied also a reversed relationship between very sensitive agricultural and industrial sectors. However, the inflation of the long sixteenth century meant also relative stability and closer integration of the international economy in com- mercial prosperity. Economic growth naturally experienced its ups and downs but these tended to be submerged in the progressive upward movement. When this pressure began to wane, the equilibrium in the international economy was impaired. The downturns in the economy, at least as far as the available evidence from grain prices suggests, were followed by phases of violent cyclic fluctuations. In the case of Spain after 1600 H. T. Davis, using the data of Earl Hamilton, has shown that the amplitude of fluctuations tended to increase. In Udine a phase of clearly defined major cycles of greater range than before appeared after 1627 (1627-36, 1636-40, 1640-6, 1646-50, 1650-3, 1653-9); and in Beauvais in France, after 1640 (1639-45, 1645-50, 1650-7, 1657-8). The cyclic nature of price movements especially during periods of crop failures was probably a European phenomenon. In the two decades 1640-60, cul- minating in the crisis of subsistence in 1649-50, the chronology of price cycles was valid with slight variations in Exeter, Paris, Lyons, Beauvais, 89 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008D E C L I N E OF S P A I N A N D THE T H I R T Y YEARS W A R 1450 1500 1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1450 1500 1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 Fig. 3. (a) Maritime trade between Seville and America, combined tonnage inward and out- ward bound [reference: H. and P. Chaunu, Seville et VAtlantique 1504 a 16so (8 vols. and annexe graphique, Paris, 1955-60)]; (6) Baltic trade (five-yearly averages)—wheat, rye, kersies [reference: N. Bang, Tabeller over Skibsfart og Varetransport gennem Oresund 1497-1660 (2 parts in 3 vols. Copenhagen, 1906-22)]; (c) builders' wage-rates in England (five-yearly averages) [reference: S. Hopkins and E. H. Phelps Brown, 'Seven centuries of prices of consumables, compared with builders' wage-rates', Economica (1956)]. 90 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 Udine, Siena and Lwow. The violence of these cycles was a sign of pro- found economic disturbances. In the space of a decade, grain prices rose as much as five times in the case of Udine and ten times in the exceptional case of the price of oats in Lwow. A final aspect of the structure of prices: the question of wages and the price of labour. The growth of the sixteenth century, according to some economic historians, implied also a fall in the living standards of labour. The cost of living and especially of food rose and the money wages of labour tended to lag behind. Hence the real equivalents of those money wages tended to fall. This has been established in the majority of cases. In Valencia the real wages of building craftsmen fell until about 1600. The available evidence for Germany and Austria tends to confirm this conclusion, although in these cases real wages tended to rise during the Thirty Years War until 1660-70. In England real wages of building craftsmen fell throughout the sixteenth century but reached a turning point about 1610-14 (see Fig. 3). From this reversal, the rising trend implied that builders were receiving better remuneration. Although this evidence for wage history gives little indication of the level of employment or of the labour force available, the important feature remains: wage trends changed at the beginning of the seventeenth century. For the period covered by this chapter, the international economy in general faced both the easing of price inflation and the rising levels of real wages and, by implication, rising production costs with their in- evitable problems and difficulties. in Yet the first call on human endeavour was to produce food. Agriculture largely dominated the structures of production. The farms, harnessed to natural productive forces, were the foremost industries of Europe, and the crafts with their capital requirements and uncertain outlets were at a disadvantage against this entrenched position. Agriculture continued to thrive in the early seventeenth century. In the Netherlands, B. H. Slicher van Bath has shown that the draining of the polders progressed during the early seventeenth century, in step with the rising grain prices in the market of Amsterdam (see Fig. 4). This land reclamation increased in the years 1590-1614; further progress was made in the next quarter of a century 1615-39. Then decline set in, and the average for 1640-64 was well below that for the previous half-century. In east Prussia, as we have already mentioned, the expansion in agriculture changed fundamentally after 1620 when the war disturbances had their full effect (see Fig. 5). The grain cargoes passing through the Sound from the Baltic confirm this impression of thriving agriculture. The tolls show that the exports of rye rose from 473,714 lasts in 1600-9 to 578,415 lasts in 1640-9; and wheat from 51,496 lasts to 160,551 lasts in the same period. Thus rye was 91 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008D E C L I N E OF S P A I N A N D THE T H I R T Y YEARS W A R l i l 1 t t 1 1 500 500- J Ti ln< ex: 1715^*0=1 00 Price of wheat > • -- | 100 1 — Maximum l Internatio nal price of whc ;at • SO 1500 ; Index: 17! 1-45 = 100 1550 1600 Minimum 1650 1700 1750 Fig. 4. Index of areas drained and wheat prices in the Netherlands (1721-45 = 100) [reference: B. H. Slicher van Bath, De agrarische Geschiedenis van West-Europa (500-1850) (Utrecht, i960)]. nine times more important than wheat in the first decade, and only four and a half times in the 1640s (see Fig. 3). Yet what justification can the Sound tolls offer for such affirmations? The quantitative evidence is not to be taken at its face value and deservedly has been subjected to con- siderable criticism from scholars, in particular Aksel Christensen, Astrid Friis, Alfred Huhnhauser, Pierre Jeannin and Walther Vogel. The extent of smuggling remains a large and perhaps unknown factor. This would modify the absolute totals of tonnage and merchandise reported passing in and out of the Baltic. It could also adjust the relative quantities of goods: for example, before the reform of 1618, rye carried less duty than wheat and as a result, in passing the customs, wheat was often declared as rye. Such considerations qualify the conclusions drawn from the appa- rently increasing shipments of wheat. In view of this, the expansion of the grain trade is difficult to explain. Ostensibly, it revealed a growing taste for luxury, wheat being destined for white bread and the tables of the well-to-do. Could it have been merely a further sign of the increasing wealth of the economies of the north? Or was it another indication of the difficult conditions in the grainlands of the Baltic countries, obliged to export their cereals? This grain trade in effect emphasized the outstanding real advantages maintained by the economies of northern and eastern Europe. Such a bulky trade required transport, warehouses and barges. It needed mer- chants prepared to carry the risks of commodity markets during good and bad years. Amsterdam was able to provide these advantages. And the producing areas of Poland, concentrated in the great estates, offered 92 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE E U R O P E A N ECONOMY 1609-50 -150 -100 150 - V \A•• "'""••A Index of wheat yields - r~ r- 1550-1696 - 1 0 0 - - ' • - V | r dex of area culti cated in wheat - 50 - 50 - 0 - 0 1500 1550 1650 1600 1700 1750 Fig. 5. Index of trends of grain production in eastern Prussia (1550-1696 =100) [reference: H.-H. Wachter, Ostpreussische Domanenvorwerke im 16. und 17. Jahrhundert (Wurzburg, 1958)]. natural resources of fertile lands and abundant labour, both tied and ser- vile, symbols of her agrarian economy. However, the grain markets did not all continue to enjoy prosperity, as can be inferred from the changing secular trends in grain prices. The 'agricultural crisis', which marked the later seventeenth century and reached a serious situation in the 1730s and 1740s, later received vociferous attention in the writings and theories of the Physiocrats. It had one notable effect in the shift away from grain to livestock raising. Conditions were different in the manufacturing sectors of the inter- national economy. The crafts distributed here and there in cities and in the surrounding countryside were all too often held together by the com- mercial capital of merchants who provided the raw materials and carried away the finished goods. As Adam Smith astutely observed, small advan- tages in production could create a considerable competitive position in foreign markets. The manufacturing sectors were far more fragile in the face of the market demand in Europe. The textile and metallurgical sectors in particular experienced dramatic changes in the early seventeenth century. Textiles were especially susceptible. Some centres in the Mediterranean producing cloth for export began to lose ground from the end of the century. In Spain the prosperity of cloth workers in some areas lasted until the 1590s. In Italy, the early seventeenth century, and not least the difficulties of the 1620s and the consequences of the plague of 1630, reserved hard times for the cloth industries. In Venice, the output of the great Arte della Lana had reached peak years in 1601 and 1602 (28,601 93 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR and 28,729 pieces respectively), and then declined throughout the seven- teenth century, the falling production following a parabolic curve (see Fig. 6). By 1650, about 10,000 pieces were produced. In Como in the early seventeenth century there were 60 workshops producing 8,000- 10,000 pieces annually; by 1650 there were 4 manufactories with an out- put of 400 pieces. Florence in the 1590s produced 13,000-14,000 pieces of woollen cloth a year, but by the mid-century it claimed only some 5,000 pieces. Italian cloth production fell away before declining demand and aggressive competition in the Levant mainly from Dutch and English traders. The competition offered by England did not conceal the very serious difficulties she herself suffered. Her export economy depended largely on wool and wool products, amounting to as much as 75%, perhaps even 90% of the total value exported. Changes in markets for her cloth abroad therefore had profound repercussions on the economic activity and material life of the country as a whole. A further potential weakness in England's position was the imbalance in the destination of the exports; at the beginning of the seventeenth century about three-quarters of the cloth export went to Germany and the United Provinces, less than one-eighth to the Baltic, almost one-sixteenth to each of France and the Levant, and the rest to Italy, Barbary and Russia. And a third weakness: England did not control the complete processing of her cloth. The greater part exported was undressed—for example, 72% from London in 1606—for finishing abroad in the more advanced cloth centres, mainly in the Nether- lands for the markets in eastern and central Europe, but also in Paris and Venice, where the cloths were dyed and given the 'Italian' finish appre- ciated in the Levant. The combination of these potential weaknesses covered in prosperous years was particularly susceptible to shocks. In 1614, a good year, 127,215 shortcloths were exported; but the position of the industry worsened at the end of the second decade of the seventeenth century. At this point Alderman Cockayne proposed to set up a consortium— the famous Project—for finishing the cloth in England, with the monopoly of the export trade thus taken out of the hands of the Merchant Adven- turers. By October 1617 this scheme had clearly failed and the former conditions were re-established. This restoration was the prelude to a de- pression beginning with the commercial slump of 1619-20, which coin- cided with the difficult years at the outbreak of the Thirty Years War, the monetary debasements in Germany and Austria, and the devaluations in Poland of 1619-23—all important markets for English cloth. Exports dropped. Shortcloths fell from 102,332 pieces in 1618 to 75,631 pieces in 1622. This crisis eventually marked a distinct break in the position of the older English draperies, henceforth to decline. The industries sought newer lines and the production improved in the lighter cloths—bays, 94 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY I6O9-5O 1450 1450 1500 1500 1550 1550 1600 1600 1650 1650 1700- 1750 1700 1750 Fig. 6. (a) The production of cloth in Leiden [reference: N. Posthumus, De Geschiedenis van de Leidsche Lakenindustrie (3 vols. The Hague, 1908-39)], Hondschoote [reference: E.Coor- naert, La draperie-sayetterie d'Hondschoote (XlVe-XVIIe slides) (Paris, 1930)], and Venice [reference: D. Sella, 'Les mouvements longs de Pindustrie lainiere', Aimales; Economies, Societes, Civilisations (1957)]; (b) of silver in Potosi, Peru [reference: M. Moreyra y Paz- Soldan, En torno a dos valiosos documentos sobre Potosi]; and (c) of copper in Sweden (five- yearly average) [reference: F. R. Tegengren, Sveriges Sdlare malmer och bergwerk (Stock- holm, 1924)]. 95 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR Spanish cloths, and perpetuanos—destined for warmer countries. English cloth had some outlets in the Levant: in 1634 the Levant Company exported some 17,000 pieces, although the average for the 1620s and 1630s may have been more in the region of 6,000 pieces yearly, in addition to the quantities sent indirectly, for example, via Leghorn. In 1628 3,346 'Spanish' cloths were sent to northern Europe; this figure rose to 13,517 in 1640. On the other hand, whilst in 1606 75*9% of the shortcloths were shipped from London by English merchants to Germany and the United Provinces, this percentage had fallen to 51-9 by 1640. These crisis years of 1620-3 in effect passed more control of cloth exports in English hands. The proportion of undressed shortcloths exported from London fell from about 72% in 1606 to 34*8% in 1640. The cloth industries were obliged to reform, the older lines falling away to make room for lighter cloths and alternative outlets. The powerful cloth industries of the Low Countries during these years also faced a series of difficulties and transformations. At first sight these appeared to be similar to those in England, since the manufactures of quality cloths for export and long-distance trade were apparently the most seriously involved. In detail, however, there were evidently impor- tant variations in type of product and of markets served which future research will no doubt differentiate more clearly. Hondschoote, recovering from the deep slump of the 1580s, enjoyed increasing production until about 1638, when 27,466 pieces were exported. Many of her weavers, however, left to swell the population and production of Leiden in the United Provinces. There, cloth working continued to grow. The total of cloth of all sorts reached 144,723 pieces in 1664, before a general decline set in. These figures, however, conceal a radical transformation of the industry. The manufacture of some of the older types of cloth declined: says after 1617 (53,568 pieces); fustians after 1624 (33,986 pieces); bays after 1633 (23,785 pieces); velvets after 1637-8 (13,454 pieces). But other lines prospered: lakens forged ahead, enjoying a spectacular rise in the 1630s and 1640s (1630: 1,780 pieces; 1640: 10,805 pieces; 1651: 22,069 pieces), thus reaching a level of production which it maintained until the 1720s. In addition, the production of camlets and warp was introduced, which reached peaks in 1669 (67,335 pieces) and 1664 (19,350 pieces) respectively (see Fig. 6). The modification of the Leiden cloth industry during the Thirty Years War, in general, also evolved new patterns of supplying long-distance markets. The mining and metallurgical sectors also prospered during the Thirty Years War. This was the great opportunity for Sweden with her rich mines of iron and copper under close royal patronage and control. The famous copper company—the Kopparkompaniet founded in 1619— benefited at first from the demand for copper money in Spain. The stop on this, in 1626, pushed Gustavus Adolphus to find other outlets, partly 96 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY I6O9-5O in copper coinage for Sweden. The production of copper, however, doubled during the war, reaching a peak in 1650 with 2,941 metric tons (see Fig. 6). This was the highest point in the seventeenth century; peace meant recession. At the beginning of the eighteenth century, however, her copper surpassed that of central Europe, and in spite of the Dutch promotion of production in Japan for use in the Far East, held a foremost place in world markets. Iron was another contribution from Sweden. During the sixteenth century its production had grown under direct crown encouragement especially from Gustavus I (1523-60), who brought in German technicians. Malleable bar iron became increasingly important from 1540, and after 1600, although twice as expensive, exceeded the older osmund iron in export value. This trend became typical of the seventeenth century: between 1600 and 1720 Swedish iron production increased five times. The exports rose during the Thirty Years War, and most spectacularly after 1627. The average annual exports of bar iron from the Baltic, if we turn once more to the uncertain evidence of the Sound tolls, increased seven- fold in a quarter-century: TABLE 12 Period Average annual exports from the Baltic in metric tons 1620-4 1645-9 1650-4 1,179 7.747 5,362 Estimates from other sources propose the following annual figures for exports from Sweden: TABLE 13 Year Estimated annual exports from Sweden in metric tons c. 1620 c. 1640 c. 1650 6,650 (bar iron and osmund) 10,600 (bar iron) 17,300 (bar iron) The conclusion of the peace faced Sweden with recession but by then her position in the metal markets had been firmly established. Eli Heckscher estimated that Sweden supplied about a third of the requirements of Europe in 1720. England was an important customer, and on the eve of the Civil War her forges worked between 14,000 and 32,000 metric tons of iron bar. About 1720, some 40% of her requirements of iron probably came from Sweden. Finally, another growth sector: the coal industry of England. Between the 1550s and the 1680s, according to John U. Nef, the production of 97 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR coal increased 14 times, a relative development far greater than in the following centuries: TABLE 14 Period Total coal produced in metric tons 1551-60 1681-90 1781-90 206,681 2,934,874 10,132,302 The shipments of coal from Newcastle, in consequence, followed this trend, particularly noticeable in the first half of the seventeenth century: TABLE 15 Year Quantity of coal shipped in metric tons Michaelmas 1591-Michaelmas 1592 Michaelmas 1608-Michaelmas 1609 Christmas 1633-Christmas 1634 June 1658-June 1659 110,356 235,490 445.472 520,671 And the consumption increased in London. There the imports passed from 34,208 in 1591-2 to 260,037 metric tons in 1667-8. Thus by the middle of the seventeenth century one of the pillars of England's future economy was firmly established. IV How then to conclude a resume all too brief for the problems involved ? The central feature has been the pause in the long economic development of Europe. Although it is probable that over large areas of the continent per capita incomes could change only within relatively confined limits, it may be assumed that there was a check and even reduction in particular aggregate national incomes during this period. The economic crisis was noticeable above all in the growth of the commercial system which had sustained Europe, and indeed the world, during the sixteenth century. Spain held a central and dominant position in that commercial pros- perity, and the turn of the sixteenth century was indeed her crisis. The defeat of the Invincible Armada, the declining cargoes of bullion from America after 1600, the long recession in the transatlantic trade of Seville after the peak years of 1607-9 (see Fig. 3), the royal bankruptcies of 1596, 1607, 1627 and 1645—all these foreshadowed her experience of growing debility and frustration in the seventeenth century. The financial tensions of the far-stretched politics of Spain, reprieved with the Truce of 1609, mounted again with the renewal of the war against the Dutch in 1621 (see Map 2). The royal bankruptcy of 1627 dragged down above all the 98 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 Genoese merchants and financiers, who had long been her persistent though not disinterested supporters. Their discomfiture proved the moment for the Portuguese, profiting by their difficulties and forecasting the revolt of 1640, in their case successful, leading to independence, but for the rebel Catalans to defeat and repression. Later the bankruptcy of 1647 finally published the incapacity of Spain, and prepared the way for the peace settlements of Westphalia in the following year, and eventually of the Pyrenees (1659). Yet the long and progressive abdication of Spain was reprieved during the Twelve Years Truce, when the international economy gained a brief respite. Then, in 1618, the outbreak of war in Germany and the great commercial crisis of 1619-20, which although neither the deciding moments for Europe, nor the sole turning points to end the sixteenth century, were nevertheless huge catastrophes. This moment of truth unmasked the unsubstantiated bravado of Spain, and inevitably also the confusion and weakness of the trading communities of southern Europe, already in difficulties. The failure of Spain to dominate in the struggle against Holland, renewed with the end of the Truce in 1621, resolved itself into a general European conflict. This confirmed the ascendancy of the thriving econo- mies of the north, above all of the Netherlands. In the seventeenth century the Dutch achieved their 'golden age', almost against the pre- vailing trends in the international economy. This in itself was a con- siderable achievement. Yet fortune smiled on the Dutch traders and investors, and with good reason. In an age of difficult transport Holland was naturally endowed with a commanding geographical position, with thrifty merchants recruited from the four corners of Europe, with an integrated transport system of canals and waterways, of warehouses, barges and a mercantile marine equipped with the successful and economical 'fluit', manned by a dozen hands, the cargo ship par excellence. Towards the end of the cen- tury, the yearly trading fleets were astonishingly large: 800 fluits to the Baltic and 400 to St Ubes in Portugal for salt; 200 to 250 whalers, 300 to 350 herring boats . . . Little wonder that Holland was able to expand and capture the profits which went with scale of enterprise. The great trading companies outlined this range of commerce: the Russia Grain Company (1608); the Northern Company (1614) for whaling and based on Spitzbergen; the New Netherlands Company (1614) for North America between the 40th and 45th parallels; and the West India Company (1621). By the Treaty of The Hague of 1669, the Dutch con- trolled the timber trade of Norway. And not least there was the trade to the East Indies. Almost symbolically, Cornelius Houtman, a Dutch merchant resident in Lisbon, sailed in 1595 with a fleet for the Indies and returned in 1597 richly furnished. The United East India Company (1602) 99 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008DECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR in league with the sultan of Bantam, found footing from 1619 in Batavia in Java. From this vantage point, with factories along the coast from Persia and India to China and Japan, established in the key port of Malacca captured from the Portuguese in 1641, they scooped up profits to raise the concentration of capital in Holland. By 1650, the governor general in Batavia reported that the cumulative profits to date exceeded 75,000,000 florins with a capital of more than 12,500,000 resting in the , Indies. It had been accomplished in half a century. The Dutch, however, did not have an open field. The competition was severe from the Portuguese (from whom they seized Elmina in 1637), and not least from England. The conflict was joined in all fields of lucrative profit. Their Northern Company of 1614 had the aim of rebutting English attacks. In the Far East, the aggressive situation was such that a treaty of partnership was made in 1619 between the English and Dutch Com- panies. This entente ended in the massacre of Amboyna (1623), when the Dutch violently asserted their ascendancy, beheaded the small colony, and effectively cleared out the competition of their English rivals. Their pre- dominancy on the seven seas found a block in the English Navigation Act (1651), and finally in war, the Anglo-Dutch War of 1652-3, first of these open hostilities to mark the seventeenth century. Although the economic development of Europe apparently underwent a sharp relapse in commercial prosperity, there were compensations. The initiative in the north of Europe showed that fundamentally the inter- national economy was endowed with strength and continuity. The trans- formations, which were evident in the case of the textile industries, were symptoms of the versatility of a mercantile system responsive to new conditions. This element of continuity was most apparent in the character and direction of capital investment. In the face of difficult times ahead, the commercial fortunes sought alternative outlets and sources of profit. De la Vega in his Confusion de Confusiones (1688) acutely describes the speculation among the merchants of Amsterdam. Although in February 1610 the Estates had forbidden the selling of shares in bianco, the proclivity to speculate was amply testified in the boom and crash of the Tulip Mania in 1636-7. Indeed, the diversion of funds into other fields prolonged and consolidated the capital gains established in the commercial prosperity of the sixteenth century. These funds no doubt turned more substantially to land and real estate. This was traditionally common to the commercial centres of Europe: merchants were accustomed to lay out wealth in land. But after the com- mercial difficulties of the 1620s it probably became more important. Aldo de Maddalena in the case of Lombardy has shown the growing investment in land from the 1620s. In Lyons, it is not surprising to find a young notary such as Le Grangier in the early 1620s leaving aside his father's business 100 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 in the fairs to deal extensively in property and marriage contracts. According to W. Hoskins, the surge in rebuilding rural England was at its height in the years 1590 to 1640. But these agrarian and land problems are complex and scholars have not yet agreed on the explanations to offer. Certainly they were set in sharp relief in the mid-seventeenth century. The outbreak and spread of the war in Germany after 1618 offered a second reprieve from economic stagnation. The Thirty Years War grew more serious with the deepening animosity between Spain and France, in open conflict after 1635. The building and commissioning of fleets, the manufacture of arms and munitions, the fortifications, the raising of armies, were all fresh opportunities. The Dutch financiers, notably from Amsterdam, were not slow to respond. A company of Amsterdam merchants in 1619 financed a gun foundry in Thuringia. Louis de Geer (1587-1652) invested heavily in the mines and production of Sweden. In 1627 the Swedish crown granted him the monopoly of founding iron canon, which he held until 1648. These Swedish iron cannon led the market, being preferred to those offered from England at the same price. Elias Trip, his partner, also deeply involved in the metal trade, had cannon foundries, gun shops and powder factories in Amsterdam, supply- ing armies and attracting buyers from all over Europe, among them the French agents of Richelieu. The boom in Swedish iron and copper helped to prolong the prosperity of the sixteenth century, but these easy market conditions did not survive the peace. Thirdly, a major outlet for investment in the seventeenth century was found in the state. As the opportunities for trading in the private sector grew more intractable, merchants became more willing to take up govern- ment loans which offered hopes of monopolies and protection. Alvaro Castillo has shown how the asientos (or loans to the Spanish monarchy) increased after 1610, as the trans-Atlantic trade of Seville declined. Yet, this sector apparently did not survive after 1640-2, and collapsed in the final exhaustion of Spain (see Map 2). The syndicates for raising royal revenues in England, and the tax-farmers in France were further signs of investment in the state, hungry for funds and ready to grant privileges in return for the means to buttress power or sustain grandiose policies. The capital assets threatened by difficult conditions again found relief in the great companies, armed to seize the initiative and win outstanding profits. The English East India Company in the first half-century offered, for example, an average return on capital of 82%. Indeed the great companies, such as in England and Holland, became so large that in time their interests combined with those of government. The Dutch West India Company (1621) was a direct instrument of war, plundering the trade routes to bring a stream of Spanish and Portuguese prize cargoes to Holland, making landings and annexing territories in the West Indies and in Brazil. In Holland itself, the Thirty Years War was a saga of intrigue 101 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008D E C L I N E OF S P A I N A N D THE T H I R T Y YEARS W A R Netherlands 2,528,405 Germany 82,742 France 31,242 * Spain 2,197.975 Seville 11,304,043: Equivalent, in kg of silver, of tola! ** imports of gold and silver in Seville,•<) Map 2. Payments of Spanish asientos, 1580-1626 (converted into kilograms of silver) [reference: A. Castillo]. between on the one hand the war party buttressed by the great companies, on occasion bribed by France, and on the other hand the peace party aiming for truce with Spain. Inevitably, in such an uneasy alliance with mercantile interests, the state, ready with monopolies for trade and manufactures, was obliged to enter more deeply into economic affairs. The policies of the great statesmen—Richelieu in France, Olivares in Spain, Oxenstierna in Sweden, Straff ord and Cromwell in England—all bore witness to the way in which economic difficulties flowed to swell the power of state. This is perhaps the most eloquent lesson of the early seventeenth century, unnerved before an unpromising future, but at the same time gifted with a propensity to create or rather to consolidate the gains achieved. Lastly, in a much larger context, capital flows faced new technological horizons through changes in the level of knowledge. Between Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) and Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727) complex advances in the understanding of the natural world brought wider perspectives, although clearly these transformations—the scientific revolution—pass the period of this chapter. In the field of mathematics and engineering, for example, considerable contributions were made in the second quarter of the seventeenth century by Galileo, Torricelli, Pascal and Descartes. 102 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY 1 6 0 9 - 5 0 Among the later mercantilists, Sir William Petty set out with computa- tions and Political Arithmetic to measure the scale of aggregate economic activity. Nor did concepts suggesting a closed society pass unchallenged, as the debate in France in the 1680s of the Ancients against the Moderns revealed. These are only brief references to a prodigious movement but it is evident that over a wide range of techniques and knowledge the seven- teenth century did not constitute a retrograde movement. Yet all this looked to the future. At the time, there seemed to be little more than a repetition of difficulties and a deepening of human misery, accompanied relentlessly by the increasing power of governments and behind them of aristocracies and ruling minorities. The state swallowed up loyalties and obligations, organized conflicts, and became the funnel for expenditures. In the outward manoeuvres and realities of war it set the targets, its own targets, refusing to allow commercial and industrial financiers to press ahead unhampered by national restrictions. It sub- mitted entrepreneurs to its own wilful behests and almost at once left them stranded. In the final analysis this aspect of the destiny of Europe is inseparable from the movement of the international economy which this chapter has all too briefly outlined. 103 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008CHAPTER III THE EXPONENTS AND CRITICS OF ABSOLUTISM 1610 and 1659 absolutism triumphed almost everywhere in Europe. Although in England monarchical absolutism failed, ' parliamentary absolutism was victorious. States were threatened by great wars and by the disruptions of wars of religion. Men's minds were challenged by theories of popular sovereignty, of contract and tyran- nicide, and by new mechanistic views of the universe. There were econo- mic crises, some caused by the falling volume of silver arriving from America, others by bad harvests, famines and epidemics, which were perhaps more frequent than in the sixteenth century. The remedy for these troubles seemed to be a political power less shackled by laws, customs and privileges, and better able to impose a common purpose upon the members of the body politic. At the centre of all the theoretical conflicts were the two principles of sovereignty and of raison d'e'tat, developed by Jean Bodin and Machiavelli respectively. Sovereignty was denned by Bodin as 'the supreme power in the State not bound by the laws . . . not recognising any superior'; its attributes are to legislate, to raise armies, make war and peace, pass final judgements on cases, raise taxes, coin money, etc. Raison d'etat covered whatever actions the prince might have to take in order to secure the safety and growth of the state. Bodin and Machiavelli were criticized, but almost all their critics bor- rowed their fundamental ideas while attempting to Christianize or adapt them. Our study of political concepts cannot be restricted to the ideas of theorists. We must try to consider what statesmen, administrators and members of different social groups thought of absolutism, what ideas and slogans moved men to act—and their relationship to their whole environ- ment. Such a history of political ideas has scarcely begun to be attempted. The conflict of political ideas in Europe did not contradict the unity of European civilization. Europe began as Christendom and it was from Christianity that all the theoreticians began. A small number of essential ideas circulated, originating from two principal centres, Spain and the Netherlands. For the Catholics these centres were the universities of Salamanca and Louvain and for the Protestants those of the United Provinces, especially Leiden. The political teaching of Justus Lipsius, professor at the University of Leiden until 1592, then, after his conversion, at Louvain, was spread by Bernegger. He was professor of history and political science at the University of Strasbourg from 1613 to 1640 and attracted students from Germany, Hungary, Denmark and Switzerland. B ETWEEN 104 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EXPONENTS AND CRITICS OF ABSOLUTISM Buckler continued the work of Bernegger at Strasbourg and a pupil of Buckler, Bosius, taught the doctrines of Lipsius at Jena from 1656 to 1676. Bernegger's son-in-law, Heim Freins, became chancellor of the University of Uppsala in 1642 and spread the theories of Lipsius in Sweden. Gustavus Adolphus learnt them from another pupil of Ber- negger, Skytte, his historiographer. There were many French students at the University of Leiden; Guez de Balzac studied there in 1615, writing a Discours Politique against absolutism, though in 1631 he became a defender of absolute monarchy. The University of Salamanca, where the disciples of Vittoria had revived the teaching of Thomism, trained the great Spanish Jesuit Suarez and many others, who went to the Roman colleges, to the universities of Louvain, Alcala, and Coimbra, spreading the political teachings of neo-Thomism among Jesuits and other eccle- siastics and thence to lay circles. Books were important in spreading political ideas. The multiplication of editions and translations of political works testified to the profound interest in them. Bodin's Republique appeared in 1576 and had nine Latin editions between 1586 and 1650, seventeen French editions between 1576 and 1753, while there were Italian, English and German translations. The Politica of Althusius had eight editions between 1603 and 1654. Justus Lipsius' Politica had an edition a year until 1618, thirty-one Latin editions in the seventeenth century, besides Dutch, French, English, German and Polish translations. Even lesser works had success: Balzac's Prince had four editions between 1631 and 1662, Philippe de Bethune's Conseiller d'etat had five between 1632 and 1665. Battles of the books aroused public attention; such as those of James I with Cardinal Bellar- mine and Cardinal du Perron. James sent his apologia against Bellarmine to all the princes, who received it coolly. However, James was much read by Italian jurists, who considered him the ideal prince. Bellarmine in 1619 dedicated his De Officio Principis to Ladislas, son of Sigismund III of Poland. The monk Paolo Sarpi fought from 1605 to 1607 on behalf of the Republic of Venice against the Roman Curia and against Bellarmine; their polemics found echoes in many pulpits. Theorists and polemicists corresponded with each other and with princes. Paolo Sarpi corresponded with the French jurists Jacques Leschassier, with Jacques Gillot and with de L'Isle-Groslot, and obtained a profound knowledge of Gallican doctrines for his struggle against the pope. Campanella corresponded with Pere Joseph after 1628 and advised Richelieu upon Italian affairs in order to further his plans for national independence, a prerequisite for absolutism. Political refugees were important. Grotius, exiled from Holland, wrote the De Jure Belli Ac Pads, in France in 1623 and 1624, before publishing it at Frankfurt in 1625 and becoming Swedish ambassador in France from 1635 to 1645. Hobbes published the De Cive in Paris in 1642 and wrote the Leviathan there. 5 105 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008 MHFDECLINE OF SPAIN AND THE THIRTY YEARS WAR The essential condition of absolutism was sovereignty which recognized no superior. But the European sovereigns, whether kings or republics, had to face the pretensions of the pope. On several occasions there were controversies which grouped together English, French, and Italian theor- ists against the pope and led to attempts at union between them and the German Protestants. From 1605 to 1607 there was the papal interdict against Venice whose legislation had limited the acquisition of real property by the church. In 1606 the pope forbade English Catholics to take the oath demanded by James I after the Gunpowder Plot. Under Henri IV the Parlement of Paris refused to accept the decrees of the Council of Trent which had confirmed the church's rights to fiscal immunity and to jurisdiction over the laity in marriages, wills, contracts and offences concerning the faith. Finally there was the murder of Henri IV (1610) by a maniac, inspired by the doctrines of the Monarcho- machs and by the Jesuit Mariana's views on tyrannicide. These conflicts produced an important European literature. The Spanish Jesuits sup- ported papal claims. Mariana's De Rege et Regis Institutione, which first appeared in 1598 was reprinted in 1610 on this occasion. It revived the old theory expressed by Boniface VII in the Bull Unam Sanctam. By divine right the pope has two swords, the temporal and the spiritual; he entrusts the temporal to the princes, but they remain responsible to him for its use and are his vicars. The pope institutes them, supervises them and, if necessary, judges and deposes them. When he releases subjects from their oath of allegiance, it becomes lawful for anyone to kill the tyrant. Except for the defence of tyrannicide, this was the favorite theory of the Roman Curia. More important was the work of the theologian Suarez who dominated Catholic thought in the seventeenth century. His De Legibus (1612) and his Defensio Fidei (1613), directed against the apology of James I, were approved by the pope and by Philip III of Spain. For Suarez, church and state were two societies, each natural and perfect in its own fashion, but differing in their origin and structure. All things spiritual and their jurisdiction belonged to the church, while all temporal matters belonged to the state. It was inconceivable that one head, the king, should control both spiritual and temporal jurisdictions, as James I claimed. The king ought not to usurp the functions of the church, while the pope had no direct authority over states, though he had an indirect power. The spiritual was superior to the temporal because it had God for its end and the pope's authority came directly from God, while that of the princes came indirectly through the people. The pope was spiritually superior to temporal princes; he had the right and duty to advise princes for the spiritual advantage to the church. He could con- strain them by ecclesiastical censures, in cases of immorality, of flagrant tyranny, or of scandals to the faith. If a prince became a heretic he could be deposed and his subjects released from their allegiance. Thus the pope 106 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008THE EXPONENTS AND CRITICS OF ABSOLUTISM could legitimately forbid Catholics to take the oath demanded by James I. This theory of potestas indirecta was, apart from some nuances, held by Cardinal Bellarmine in De Potestate Summi Pontificis (1610); De Officio Principis Christiani (1619), and expounded by Cardinal du Perron to the French Estates General (1615). These theories were opposed by James I, who summarized part of the Protestant political tradition. For Luther, the authority of the state, like all authority, came from God and the people ought to submit to it, even if it were tyrannical, though the prince ought to respect the two tables of the law. Calvin held that magistrates were the vicars of God and were owed absolute obedience by the people even in cases of tyranny. James I's principal works were The Trew Law of Free Monarchies (1598), the Basilikon Down (1599), An Apologiefor the Oath ofAllegience (1607) and A Defence of the Right of Kings against Cardinal Perron (1615). James claimed that he was personally chosen by God to govern his people, was invested directly by God with his sovereignty and was accountable to God alone. The pope had no concern in this and this was why James demanded from his Catholic subjects an oath that the pope had no right to depose the king, nor to dispose of his dominions, nor to authorize any foreign prince to invade them, nor to discharge any of his subjects from their allegiance, nor to authorize anyone to bear arms against the king, or threaten his person and that they would defend the king and his heirs if the pope excommunicated them. Paul V forbade the taking of this oath because it wounded the Catholic faith and jeopardized the safety and salvation of souls. Bellarmine declared that it denied the primacy of the Apostolic See and transferred authority over the English church from the successor of St Peter to the successor of Henry VIII. But the opinions of the Curia, of Suarez and of Bellarmine were only theologically probable. A Catholic who did not profess them did not cease to be a Catholic, as the affair of the Interdict against Venice showed. The Venetians considered that their laws were of long standing and similar to those of other states, while the pope was only seeking a pretext to extend his jurisdiction and to attack in Venice the right of all princes. Venice declared herself resolved to continue Catholic, while defending herself. The magistrates ensured that the churches remained open, despite the interdict, and were supported by the great majority. The republic consulted jurists in Padua, Milan, France, and Spain, and took the monk Paolo Sarpi as their adviser. He, together with several theologians, published the Trattato dell'Interdetto. God had ordained two forms of government, one spiritual, the other temporal. Each of these is supreme in its own sphere and independent of the other, having no right to inter- fere with the other. Thus the pope has no power to annul the laws of princes on temporal matters, or to dethrone them, or to release their subjects from allegiance. Ecclesiastics have no sanction by divine law to 107
